[Amit Varma]: How do we evaluate our precedents in prime ministers?
[Amit Varma]: Ideally, we should do so on the basis of their governance.
[Amit Varma]: But governance is complicated, the economy is complicated, policy is complicated, the
[Amit Varma]: state is a convoluted beast that moves in many directions at once, and disentangling
[Amit Varma]: all of these is hard.
[Amit Varma]: How much of what happened is down to the decisions of the person at the top.
[Amit Varma]: How many of those decisions were good or bad, regardless of the consequences?
[Amit Varma]: What are the counterfactuals?
[Amit Varma]: What are the counter-narratives?
[Amit Varma]: In most cases, we can't tell.
[Amit Varma]: So we instead judge our leaders based on our prior perceptions of them, the image we already
[Amit Varma]: have in our minds.
[Amit Varma]: We rationalize or condemn everything they do, regardless of what they actually do.
[Amit Varma]: Often, we judge them based on the ideological or political tribe we have already chosen.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes, though, a leader is either so bad or so good that even those blinkers are irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like that when I think of a man called P. V. Narasimha Rao.
[Amit Varma]: Born 101 years ago on June 28, 1921, Narasimha Rao happened to be the compromise candidate
[Amit Varma]: when he became the Prime Minister of India in June 1991.
[Amit Varma]: India was in the middle of an existential economic crisis.
[Amit Varma]: Bold action was needed to get us out of it.
[Amit Varma]: We needed to go against every political current that had brought India to where it was.
[Amit Varma]: Narasimha Rao was a man of great learning, but India needed a man of great action.
[Amit Varma]: He realized the gravity of the situation and used his political skills to bring about the
[Amit Varma]: famous reforms that lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: What he did for humanity is incalculable.
[Amit Varma]: And yet, his achievements are today minimized and even mocked by his own party.
[Amit Varma]: There's a haunting image of dogs nipping at his half-burned body on his funeral pyre after
[Amit Varma]: he died.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a perfect metaphor for what this country has done to one of its tallest leaders.
[Amit Varma]: If it was not for P. V. Narasimha Rao, I may not have been recording this today.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're Indian, you may not have been listening to it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Vinay Sitapati, a political scientist who's been on the show before to
[Amit Varma]: discuss the history of the BJP before Modi.
[Amit Varma]: That's one of the most popular episodes of the show.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll link it from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: When Vinay got in touch recently and said he was visiting Mumbai, why don't we meet
[Amit Varma]: for coffee?
[Amit Varma]: I instantly took the chance to invite him back to my home studio to discuss his outstanding
[Amit Varma]: first book, Half Lion, How P. V. Narasimha Rao Transformed India.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay came over for a meal and a recording.
[Amit Varma]: And we had this conversation.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay's book began with the question of how central Narasimha Rao was to the 1991 reforms.
[Amit Varma]: Would they have happened anyway?
[Amit Varma]: His narrative reveals that without the man who put together the remarkable team that
[Amit Varma]: carried out the reforms, they may not have happened.
[Amit Varma]: His book also paints a fantastic picture of Narasimha Rao, the man.
[Amit Varma]: Here was a boy from humble background whose hunger for learning was second to none.
[Amit Varma]: He was a self-taught polymath who knew 13 languages, 10 of them spoken by humans and
[Amit Varma]: three computer languages that he taught himself when he discovered computers in his 60s.
[Amit Varma]: He was erudite, pragmatic, and when action was required, a man of action.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay's book brings out these aspects of his character and is also unflinching in looking
[Amit Varma]: at the things he got wrong.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay and I spoke about many other issues, and the first half is a freewheeling chat
[Amit Varma]: on politics, history, political science, why we want the things we want, and a road between
[Amit Varma]: Bandra Station and Bandra Reclamation that contains all of India within it.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the conversation though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more?
[Amit Varma]: I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading habit.
[Amit Varma]: This means that I read more books, but I also read more long-form articles and essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do we know what to read?
[Amit Varma]: How do we put the right incentives in place?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I discovered one way.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com,
[Amit Varma]: which aims to help people up-level themselves by reading more.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called The Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long-form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I did before.
[Amit Varma]: So if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ Compounds and check out
[Amit Varma]: their Daily Reader.
[Amit Varma]: New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up-to-date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills, and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Future Stack batches start every Saturday.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees, 2,500 if you use the discount
[Amit Varma]: code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com and use the code UNSEEN.
[Amit Varma]: Uplevel yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay, welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Guest]: Thank you very much, Amit.
[Guest]: It's a pleasure to be here.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's especially a pleasure for me because our last episode was actually recorded
[Amit Varma]: remotely and it's just much better to kind of be sitting here in front of each other,
[Guest]: isn't it?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this could not be less remote.
[Amit Varma]: Not be less remote.
[Amit Varma]: For the listeners, he is not on my lap.
[Amit Varma]: It is a little remote.
[Amit Varma]: But the episode we did together, by the way, if I remember correctly, is the fifth most
[Amit Varma]: downloaded episode of The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: So I think it struck a chord with a lot of people.
[Guest]: Oh, thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Amit Varma]: Let's hope this gets a little higher than that.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to start off by sort of referring to an episode with you and indeed your book
[Amit Varma]: on the BJP really eye-opening for me.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to start off by asking you about something that we spoke about.
[Amit Varma]: And then subsequently, you know, there's been a counter narrative to that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, when Dhirendra Jha's book Gandhi's Assassins came out recently, there was a prominent blurb
[Amit Varma]: by Christophe Jaffrelot saying that, oh, to the effect of, I don't remember the exact
[Amit Varma]: words, but to the effect of this proves that the RSS was involved in Gandhi's murder.
[Amit Varma]: And when we spoke, you pointed out how, yeah, Godse was in the RSS in the 1930s.
[Amit Varma]: But then by the early 1940s, he had, I mean, he didn't formally resign, but he had nothing
[Amit Varma]: to do with them.
[Amit Varma]: And most importantly, in his magazine Agrani, for years before he assassinated Gandhiji,
[Amit Varma]: he railed against two targets, which were RSS and Gandhiji, which kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: proves that he would have had nothing to, you know, he was completely out of the RSS
[Amit Varma]: orbit.
[Amit Varma]: And this book using mostly circumstantial evidence claims seems to imply that, no, he
[Amit Varma]: was an active part of the RSS, which I didn't see any direct evidence for it was circumstantial.
[Amit Varma]: And also that the RSS is involved in the murder.
[Amit Varma]: So firstly, you know, what would your response to that be?
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, the broader question is, is that, you know, I abhor the RSS and obviously
[Amit Varma]: abhor Godse as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think that one needs to associate them necessarily and force fit them together
[Amit Varma]: to be against them.
[Amit Varma]: So it's almost as if that this narrative is important for people to prove as they've been
[Amit Varma]: kind of talking about for the last, you know, since Gandhiji died.
[Guest]: So what's your take on this?
[Guest]: Well, let's stick to the facts for a minute before, you know, the larger narrative, right?
[Guest]: It's a clear fact that Godse was a Hindu nationalist in that he believed in Hindutva.
[Guest]: He was a fan of Savarkar.
[Guest]: The criticisms that he had of Gandhi are the exact criticisms the RSS had of Gandhi.
[Guest]: There's no disagreement on that.
[Guest]: Even the RSS would say that, look, we may respect Gandhi, but these are the criticisms
[Guest]: we had of him, etc, etc, appeasing Muslims, appeasing Muslim League, you know, appeasing
[Guest]: Pakistan after creation of Pakistan, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So both Godse and the RSS had the same views on Gandhi.
[Guest]: The question and the question for criminal liability is, was the RSS involved in the
[Guest]: murder of Mahatma Gandhi?
[Guest]: There is no evidence for that, right?
[Guest]: There's a little more circumstantial evidence that says, look, what's the role of Savarkar,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But in the, and this is not a question that has not been asked.
[Guest]: This is a question that has been asked heavily for the last 75 years.
[Guest]: Immediately after Gandhi's murder, RSS was banned.
[Guest]: The police, which was run by Patel, was not sympathetic to the RSS at all.
[Guest]: And a year later, they found no evidence against the RSS, which is why they removed the ban
[Guest]: on the RSS.
[Guest]: Why would they remove the ban if the RSS was involved, right?
[Guest]: The RSS was not charge-sheeted, people were arrested, but nobody in the RSS was convicted
[Guest]: or punished for this.
[Guest]: And for decades later, this question has been asked again and again and again, right?
[Guest]: And as you point out, the new book is, you know, is circumstantial evidence and you have
[Guest]: to then ask the question, why are we interested in that today?
[Guest]: Because somehow you want to tarnish the BJP today with something that happened 75 years
[Guest]: ago and on which so much research has already been done, right?
[Guest]: And as you said, why can't you just criticize the BJP saying that, you know, and I do that
[Guest]: in my book saying that, you know, it's treatment of Muslims is unconscionable, etc, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Why do you have to invent these other things, right?
[Guest]: The other thing that has constantly been, I would say, invented on the BJP is that it's
[Guest]: fundamentally a Brahminical upper-caste organization.
[Guest]: It's not.
[Guest]: And if it has that in the beginning, it's certainly not the case under Modi and, you
[Guest]: know, Amit, I keep wondering, why can't you just say the problem with the BJP is that
[Guest]: it's majoritarian, that, you know, 200 million Indian citizens it seeks to exclude from citizenship.
[Guest]: That's bad enough, right?
[Guest]: Why do you have to, you know, and the problem with doing this and especially things like
[Guest]: the relationship between RSS and Gandhi's murder, which, by the way, was a Congress
[Guest]: political platform for decades after, which is, you know, vote mat de do Gandhi ke hatyaron
[Guest]: ko.
[Guest]: That used to be the voting rallying cry, but there's just no evidence for that.
[Guest]: And I feel in some senses, you know, critics of the BJP do themselves disservice with these
[Guest]: kind of allegations that have been exhaustively studied and exhaustively disproved over seven
[Guest]: decades.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And, and Dhilendra Jha, by the way, is a wonderful writer.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not about him as well.
[Amit Varma]: I loved his previous two books, which I recommend you read, called The Dark Knight and Ascetic
[Amit Varma]: Games.
[Amit Varma]: The Dark Knight, in fact, has a history of how the whole Babri Masjid controversy started.
[Amit Varma]: Akar Patel first told me about that book.
[Amit Varma]: So a wonderful journalist, not a knock on him.
[Amit Varma]: And this book also has some excellent journalism slash history and, you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But it also seems that there is, you know, a need to kind of push a narrative about a
[Amit Varma]: party where absolutely everything is black.
[Amit Varma]: And if this has become a dominant narrative that the RSS killed Gandhi, then they've got
[Amit Varma]: to find a way to kind of talk about it, where I found, you know, my conversation with you
[Amit Varma]: enlightening on this that, you know, Godse railed against them for years in his magazine
[Amit Varma]: Agrani.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, you can't necessarily absolve Savarkar in the same way.
[Amit Varma]: But that's again, a whole different story.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as caste is concerned, you know, the fact is that both in 2014 and 2019, more
[Amit Varma]: Dalits voted for the BJP than they did for any other party.
[Guest]: And it's the same with OBCs and tribals too.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: Casteism is pernicious and is unfortunately still a part of Hindu society.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and that's a terrible thing.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully one day we get past it, though we are nowhere close to doing so.
[Amit Varma]: But that doesn't mean that Hindutva per se is necessarily casteist.
[Amit Varma]: What Hindutva is, especially as we see it today, is anti Muslim and, you know, and that
[Amit Varma]: is a big problem.
[Amit Varma]: And that's reason enough, I think, in my mind to sort of oppose it.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you've mentioned to me that you've never voted for the BJP and why and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And we've just kind of spoken about the anti Muslimness and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But is it the case that after you came out with these two books on Narasimha Rao, which
[Amit Varma]: we'll discuss in some detail and which I really love reading, and your book on the BJP for
[Amit Varma]: Modi that people, especially within academia, within the world of history, began to look
[Amit Varma]: at you differently, as if in some way, you are an apologist of some sort, just because
[Amit Varma]: of the subject that you chose.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, a long time back, I remember I did an episode with Prashant Jha, who wrote the
[Amit Varma]: book How the BJP won, which is about 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And there is nothing, nothing in that book, which indicates ready supports of BJP.
[Amit Varma]: It's just data analysis and really sharp analysis and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But I mentioned that book to a friend and said, you really must read this if you want
[Amit Varma]: to understand why they won in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And he's like, nah, nah, he must be a BJP guy or whatever.
[Guest]: Have you had to go through that?
[Guest]: That's a very interesting question, you know, because for my first book, which is what we're
[Guest]: going to discuss today in detail, the biography on Narasimha Rao, the hot button political
[Guest]: question was economic liberalization, right?
[Guest]: And of course, I asked the question, who did it?
[Guest]: Who was the author of liberalization?
[Guest]: And I argue that look, it was a political, not a technocratic process.
[Guest]: And therefore, the primary responsibility lies with the politician in question, which
[Guest]: is Narasimha Rao.
[Guest]: But an underlying assumption was that liberalization was a good thing, right?
[Guest]: That it worked, that it, you know, has brought about growth, that it has lifted enormous
[Guest]: amounts of Indians out of poverty, that it has increased government revenue to the extent
[Guest]: that it can fund welfare schemes like NREGA, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyano, even the food security
[Guest]: package that India has in a way in which prior to 1991, Indian government simply didn't have
[Guest]: the resources.
[Guest]: And while it has increased inequality, which is a problem, Indian inequality by at least
[Guest]: by Gini coefficient standards is not alarmingly high, it's a problem.
[Guest]: But you know, poverty reduction, high GDP growth are spectacular, right?
[Guest]: Now, when I wrote that, I was worried that I would get pushback from lots of people who
[Guest]: felt that liberalization was a bad thing, right?
[Guest]: I did not, right?
[Guest]: And I was not tarred saying that, oh, you are a, you know, neoliberal, right?
[Guest]: And I think, Amit, it's because in India, that battle has been won, you know, that in
[Guest]: a deep way, whether it's Mayawati or Samajwadi Party or DMK, the broad agreement is that,
[Guest]: you know, the state has to retreat from the market broadly, right?
[Guest]: And instead, the state has to play an active role when it comes to welfare schemes and
[Guest]: the two are connected, because when the state retreats from the market and allows for private
[Guest]: enterprise, state taxation goes up, and it's able to use that increased revenue for welfare
[Guest]: schemes, which then allows them to win votes, right?
[Guest]: This is a broad social democratic contract that has now become common sense in India.
[Guest]: And it has become common sense that look, if you want welfare schemes of the NREGA scale,
[Guest]: you know, you better get high GDP growth.
[Guest]: And if you want high GDP growth, the state better retreat from the market, right, roughly.
[Guest]: So that has not happened, right?
[Guest]: So the second book, on the other hand, Amit, I have got pushback, saying that, you know,
[Guest]: are you an apologist for the BJP, right?
[Guest]: And I find that a ridiculous argument that just because I'm saying that they're not fascist,
[Guest]: they are, you know, driven by elections, they are focused on winning elections.
[Guest]: And I'm arguing that if you want to beat them, beat them on the electoral battlefield, right?
[Guest]: And I was thinking about Amit that, you know, I mean, I'm not invested in Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: in that I'm not going to spend my entire career writing books on Hindu nationalism.
[Guest]: But something that I did notice is that there's very little academic, genuine academic debate
[Guest]: on Hindu nationalism, you know, I mean, I did my PhD in Princeton, I just finished doing
[Guest]: teaching a semester at Princeton.
[Guest]: So I'm quite familiar with global academia when it comes to India.
[Guest]: And also, of course, Indian academia, when it comes to India, I teach at Ashoka University.
[Guest]: And, you know, if you wanted a genuine debate on the BJP, genuinely, you'd be hard pressed
[Guest]: to find an ideologically diverse panel, academic panel, right?
[Guest]: That's a problem.
[Guest]: Because academia works best when you have peer pushback and peer review, right?
[Guest]: When you have groupthink in academia, it's deadly, because there's no other way in which
[Guest]: academic truths are validated.
[Guest]: It's not validated by the external world, by the number of books you sell by a third
[Guest]: party.
[Guest]: It's, you know, especially social science, humanities is inherently subjective.
[Guest]: So what you hope keeps academic honest is peer review.
[Guest]: And that just doesn't exist for Hindu nationalism, right?
[Guest]: And the debates on Hindu nationalism are minor, you know, is it fascist or is it on the way
[Guest]: to fascism?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And that's a problem.
[Guest]: And I worry and I and you know, this book was in some sense, an attempt to counter that
[Guest]: saying that, look, you know, it's dangerous when academics and intellectuals tend to have
[Guest]: just one narrative, right?
[Guest]: And if you notice, the right wing keeps pushing back against academia saying this.
[Guest]: And I think that it has more than a kernel of truth, of course, to what extent they use
[Guest]: the right wing uses this is very different, you know, and they use it often to stifle
[Guest]: debate rather than to say, let's have better debate, right?
[Guest]: But they are onto a kernel of something saying that, you know, you don't have ideological
[Guest]: heterogeneity on a very, very hot button question in India.
[Guest]: On the other hand, on economics, you do and I'm happy about that.
[Guest]: You know, if you wanted to have a panel on is liberalization good or bad, even though
[Guest]: there is broad political consensus that it's a good thing, you would have intellectual
[Guest]: disagreement and I'm even though I literally load a book saying that liberalization is
[Guest]: a good thing.
[Guest]: I'm happy that there are academics who are constantly pointing to flaws in the way India
[Guest]: did liberalization in 1991.
[Guest]: And that makes for a healthy academic atmosphere.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I'm one of them who criticizes the 91 reforms, because I feel we didn't reform
[Amit Varma]: enough, right, which is, I think, one point of view, which would have been absent at the
[Amit Varma]: time, because I think the academic world would have been against them at the time, but I
[Amit Varma]: guess gradually it turned I mean, you get mugged by reality.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: And I had a great episode in the 91 reforms with Shruti Rajgopalan and Ajay Shah, which
[Amit Varma]: I linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: And what you mentioned about poverty going down and inequality going up is a point I
[Amit Varma]: keep making, I mean, on the show and in columns that people confuse the two people often rage
[Amit Varma]: against inequality when actually is poverty that they mean, you know, a common question
[Amit Varma]: that I like to ask people on the subject is, in which of these two countries would you
[Amit Varma]: rather be poor, Bangladesh or the USA?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, everybody would rather be poor in the USA.
[Amit Varma]: But the truth is, the USA has far more inequality than Bangladesh.
[Amit Varma]: And now that Bangladesh is having healthier economic growth than before, hopefully that's
[Amit Varma]: changing and it would be changing in the direction of poverty going down and inequality going
[Amit Varma]: up because everybody is getting richer, but the rich are getting richer at a faster rate
[Amit Varma]: than the poor.
[Amit Varma]: But what is important here is what the philosopher Harry Frankfurt calls a doctrine of sufficiency,
[Amit Varma]: that do you have enough to live an autonomous life with a certain amount of dignity?
[Amit Varma]: And if you have that, that's what matters.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, when you are a nation that is as poor as India is, your first priority
[Amit Varma]: is always to kind of get rid of poverty.
[Amit Varma]: So before we kind of get to your book on Narasimha Rao, which is so illuminating and fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and so resonant, even in modern times, I'd like to know a little bit more about you.
[Amit Varma]: Now, typically, I do spend an hour, an hour and a half with my guests talking about the
[Amit Varma]: past life.
[Amit Varma]: So I had assumed that I must have done that with you the last time we spoke.
[Amit Varma]: But even though that was, I think, three hours, 40 minutes, we didn't spend that much time
[Amit Varma]: you did speak a lot on writing your writing process, which I loved and many of my writing
[Amit Varma]: students have loved.
[Amit Varma]: I keep quoting you, you know what you said about perfection being the enemy of production,
[Amit Varma]: which sinks in with what I believe about writing as well, that your priority should be to get
[Amit Varma]: it done and not to get it right.
[Amit Varma]: And often just getting it done again and again is the way to get it right.
[Amit Varma]: But we didn't speak about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: And I just found out today that you are a Bombay boy, and you were kind of born and
[Amit Varma]: brought up here and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that, you know, what was, how did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: What were your childhood years like?
[Guest]: So I grew up in Bombay, my dad worked for Exim Bank, which is a PSU, public sector enterprise.
[Guest]: And in 1991, he moved.
[Guest]: And it was a dislocating period for us, if I look back at it, because, you know, when
[Guest]: you're in a public sector unit, and this is pre 1991, pre Narsimha Rao, you know, you
[Guest]: have a car, you have a driver, you live in an apartment, there's a certain sense of stability,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And then he, you know, he tried to make it on his own and, you know, big bad world of,
[Guest]: you know, the private sector.
[Guest]: And I saw, you know, that change of 91 taking place in my family, right?
[Guest]: What did that mean was opportunity, but it was much more, you know, winner takes all,
[Guest]: there was an element of insecurity, there was an element of risk.
[Guest]: So I grew up with that.
[Guest]: So in that sense, 91 shaped me.
[Guest]: I spent much of my childhood in Bandra, right next to Leelavati Hospital, I don't know how
[Guest]: many of your listeners know that.
[Guest]: But it was quite a fascinating part of Bandra and Bombay that I grew up in, I still remember
[Guest]: that I used to take this road from Bandra station, all the way back home to Bandra reclamation.
[Guest]: And that one road told me much more about India than I learned, you know, at Princeton
[Guest]: or anywhere else.
[Guest]: You begin that road in Bandra station, which is a cosmopolitan place, people of all castes
[Guest]: and communities and classes come there.
[Guest]: And then you walk a little more and you know, you cross Lucky restaurant and as you enter,
[Guest]: it's a Sunni Muslim part.
[Guest]: So there are Indian Muslims, many of them are Sunni.
[Guest]: And you know, you'll see butcher shops there, you know, these are lower middle class Muslims,
[Guest]: you see many electronic stores, etc, etc.
[Guest]: You just walk for a minute on the straight road and you'll see a Jain temple, right?
[Guest]: And I'm just, you know, I used to turn back and I used to see meat shops and I used to
[Guest]: look in front and I used to see this Jain temple, right?
[Guest]: And then I used to see Jains basically crossing to go to the temple and they wouldn't look
[Guest]: left or right because otherwise they'd see meat.
[Guest]: And you know what, there was coexistence, there was coexistence, right?
[Guest]: And in 1991, during the, sorry, just before that, during the riots, the 1992, the Babri
[Guest]: Masjid riots, that road was not badly hit at all, right?
[Guest]: Tells you that, you know, India has an ancient tradition of tolerance and coexistence.
[Guest]: Anyway, you walk a little more on that road, you cross the Jain temple and it's a Marathi
[Guest]: area.
[Guest]: There's a Marathi school there.
[Guest]: A little more and you enter into the Bandra Bazaar, which is heavily Catholic.
[Guest]: And you know, these are middle class Catholics, but they have permanent structures, permanent
[Guest]: buildings, right?
[Guest]: And the thing that used to strike me is that unlike any other community, Hindu, Muslim,
[Guest]: whatever caste, whatever region, the Catholic areas, the public space was clean, you know?
[Guest]: And so it wasn't just that, you know, that the house was clean and the kachra would fall
[Guest]: on the street.
[Guest]: The street itself was clean, right?
[Guest]: And it has always stayed with me that, you know, sometimes, you know, there are certain
[Guest]: religious or intellectual traditions that make a public sphere more possible than others,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the way you treat strangers, you know, whether you're able to keep not just your
[Guest]: house clean, but the road in front of you clean is not just randomly distributed, right?
[Guest]: And anyway, the Catholic area would end and then there would be a Bangladeshi slum, which
[Guest]: you would walk across.
[Guest]: And then there would be a set of middle class Maharashtrian buildings where we lived and
[Guest]: around reclamation and many of the labor for those middle class Maharashtrian buildings
[Guest]: would come from the Bangladeshis, right, who lived in those slums.
[Guest]: And it still struck me that the, you know, if I, again, you know, this is just anecdotal,
[Guest]: I haven't done survey data, but most of the people who lived in those buildings would
[Guest]: be sympathetic to the Shiv Sena, right?
[Guest]: And they live cheek by jowl with the other, right?
[Guest]: Bangladeshi Muslims who, you know, Baltakray would rail against.
[Guest]: But there was coexistence.
[Guest]: I mean, I must have walked thousands of times on that street up and down to Bandra station
[Guest]: and reclamation and back.
[Guest]: And I would, you know, at the time, I didn't like it, I was like, I wish I could take an
[Guest]: auto or a car to go to the station.
[Guest]: But on hindsight, I think that journey taught me more than a lot of books I've read.
[Amit Varma]: That's so resonant.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you should write an essay about that walk, perhaps, I mean, there's so much in
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: What went wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, I once in an episode with JP Narayan, episode 149, which I link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes, was on one of my usual rants about, hey, India is so illiberal and look
[Amit Varma]: at communalism, look at caste, look at gender.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that if you look at it another way, if you look at the lived realities of
[Amit Varma]: people, there's also a deep liberalism here, because it is also so assimilative.
[Amit Varma]: You look at our food, you look at our clothes, you look at the street that you just described,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: It's in its lived reality, it can also be incredibly assimilative, and it would seem
[Amit Varma]: that the majority of people in the concrete live their lives that way.
[Amit Varma]: So what went wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things that I felt while, you know, reading Akshay Mukul's book, which
[Amit Varma]: also we discussed when we last spoke, and I know you have some disagreements with it,
[Amit Varma]: was that there was always this intolerant, illiberal strain, this bigoted strain, so
[Amit Varma]: to say, running through Indian society, it was always there, it was not a political creation.
[Amit Varma]: And the politics that we see today is the supply side of the political marketplace responding
[Amit Varma]: to a demand that was already there, like I had an episode with Veer Sanghvi about his
[Amit Varma]: memoir, and in that he speaks about how Rajiv Gandhi's big win in 1984 was partly the Hindu
[Amit Varma]: vote turnout, because, you know, the anti-Sikh stuff and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that was what made the BJP in a sense, shift direction from, you know, their sort
[Amit Varma]: of the socialism that they came to propound in 1980, Gandhian socialism, back to integral
[Amit Varma]: humanism, back to back to integral humanism and quoting this Hindu vote.
[Amit Varma]: So it was supply responding to demand and then a race to the bottom from there.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your take from your road which goes from station to reclamation and where all
[Amit Varma]: of India lives?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: How have we come here?
[Guest]: Well, firstly, you know, the data backs up my analysis of that road.
[Guest]: So if I would urge your readers to read the 2022 Pew survey on religions, which shows
[Guest]: you that most Indians live segregated lives in that, you know, their best friends, their
[Guest]: neighbors tend to be people who are from their religious group.
[Guest]: But it's also a deeply tolerant life.
[Guest]: So in India, segregation and tolerance go hand in hand and we will live among ourselves,
[Guest]: we will marry amongst ourselves, but you too will achieve liberation through your sect
[Guest]: or your religion and you have as much right to live here as I do, right.
[Guest]: So in India, you know, it's really communities living cheek by jowl, they're not individuals
[Guest]: living, it's not Western style cosmopolitanism, it is groups living, but groups living side
[Guest]: by side and having some interactions like economic interactions, but not others.
[Guest]: For example, eating food together or marrying together, right.
[Guest]: The other way of saying this is that, you know, if you see this segregation as bigotry,
[Guest]: you will say the bigotry goes hand in hand in tolerance, right.
[Guest]: That has always been the nature of India that, you know, that it's not that this has always
[Guest]: been spooked, there's been riots, you know, for a very long time, there's been Hindu Muslim
[Guest]: conflict wasn't invented by the British, right, as Marxist historians like to say, it's an
[Guest]: age-old issue, but that has gone hand in hand with Hindus and Muslims living together, right.
[Guest]: And in the book, we'll talk about it, but in Narsimha Rao book around 1993, Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao was Prime Minister and then he, Samuel Huntingdon has written this article called
[Guest]: Clash of Civilizations, which then became a book Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking
[Guest]: of the World Order in Foreign Affairs and Narsimha Rao has friends in the US who send
[Guest]: him the latest academic articles and he's reading it and in his archives, I found and
[Guest]: if you see in my book, I have a photo of Narsimha Rao's version of Clash of Civilizations with
[Guest]: his notes and the notes are very telling and these notes that Narsimha Rao writes on Clash
[Guest]: of Civilizations was written just a few months after the end of Babri Masjid, right, December
[Guest]: 6, 1992, just a few months after that.
[Guest]: And also keep in mind that Narsimha Rao grew up in a part of India that had a very strong
[Guest]: Muslim influence.
[Guest]: It was Nizam's Hyderabad state.
[Guest]: Many of his childhood friends were Muslims, right and he writes there in the margin that
[Guest]: if Samuel Huntingdon is trying to explain why Islam is in conflict with other religions,
[Guest]: why does he not explain the moments in which Islam is not in conflict?
[Guest]: In other words, you have a theory there, Sam Huntingdon provides a theory for why there
[Guest]: is a clash of civilizations from time immemorable between Islam and its neighbors, right and
[Guest]: he provides a theory for that based on the nature of Islam.
[Guest]: But then you should also have a theory for when Islam coexists with its neighbors as
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao says happened through his childhood, right and then you should equally say what
[Guest]: is it about Islam that allows you to live in coexistence with Islam, right and that
[Guest]: definitely when I was reading that, I was remembering my own childhood and walking up
[Guest]: and down this road for so long and this element of coexistence, but you know Amit, that experience
[Guest]: of walking down that road taught me very early to be suspicious of a cosmopolitan individual
[Guest]: right centric narrative of India.
[Guest]: It just doesn't exist, right and given that I have some sense of where your economics
[Guest]: is headed, I think some of India's economic tragedies can also be put down to the fact
[Guest]: that we don't treat individuals with any dignity in this country.
[Guest]: It's all about groups.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a fantastic insight and I'll think aloud and I'll just kind of ask you
[Amit Varma]: a question because it strikes me that when you live like this segregated but tolerant,
[Amit Varma]: right, where you have groups living side by side and not a cosmopolitan individualistic
[Guest]: kind of
[Guest]: I'm sorry to interrupt you, you know, since you know, we both have our bones in Bombay,
[Guest]: you know, if you live in Bombay, what everybody ends up talking about is real estate and look
[Guest]: at the politics of buildings in Bombay, Jain only buildings, no vegetarians allowed.
[Guest]: So we are reproducing in the most visually cosmopolitan thing you can have which is an
[Guest]: apartment complex.
[Guest]: We are reproducing old communities living together, you know, no garlic in this building,
[Guest]: no onion in that building.
[Guest]: This is not just a Muslim building, this is a Bora building only, this particular hospital
[Guest]: has been built by Boris only.
[Guest]: We are reproducing exactly that, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: You have a ton of individual choices which individuals have the right to make leading
[Amit Varma]: to what is a bad collective outcome, a bad social outcome.
[Amit Varma]: So my musing is this and I'm strictly thinking aloud based on what you just said that consider
[Amit Varma]: two scenarios and one scenario is that you live as we do where you have people living
[Amit Varma]: in groups segregated but tolerant and they're living in peace like in that lane you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: and as in India for you know, most of our history in most places and in the other scenario
[Amit Varma]: you have a cosmopolitan atomized existence individuals living in flats and apartments
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: My sense is that the first situation where you think in terms of groups is likely to
[Amit Varma]: break down at some point or the other simply because what you are really doing by living
[Amit Varma]: in groups is saying that this is my in group and those are the other and at one point you
[Amit Varma]: say I will be tolerant to the other but wherever you are hit by say extreme scarcity or all
[Amit Varma]: kind you know, there can be other triggers you can hit the other as well whereas if you're
[Amit Varma]: living an individual atomized existence that kind of hatred against a particular group
[Amit Varma]: of people is less likely.
[Amit Varma]: So in the second scenario where your cosmopolitan and individual rights matter, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: serial killers, perhaps those are the outliers, but in the first scenario, you could have
[Amit Varma]: a genocide at some point or the other.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, given a large enough sample size, it's inevitable.
[Guest]: Well, let me push back against that, you know, and I'm happy you said this because I was
[Guest]: you know, with you Amit, I'm worried will we ever have even four hours if we chat will
[Guest]: we have a disagreement.
[Guest]: So I'm happy that you said this because I would push back to say that to defend India's
[Guest]: segregation but tolerance, right to defend it.
[Guest]: Firstly, it's all we have, right.
[Guest]: So as a reality, you know, if you are thinking about changing India, you got to work with
[Guest]: the India you have.
[Amit Varma]: So we don't we're not living in Switzerland.
[Amit Varma]: I meant in terms of a thought experiment, I completely agree that me certainly I don't
[Amit Varma]: know about you.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a complete misfit in this society.
[Amit Varma]: Because I think in terms of individuals, I refuse to put labels on someone and say, oh,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that person is this caste or this religion or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And I reject all those labels when applied to me as well, you know, so even if I'm born
[Amit Varma]: a Hindu, I'm an atheist, you know, I'm not going to accept any labels.
[Amit Varma]: Even a label of atheists, you know, you, you know, I'm who I am.
[Amit Varma]: And so but I completely recognize that in our society, our society is always pretty
[Amit Varma]: much destined for the foreseeable future to be group.
[Guest]: I think the best we can hope for Amit is that in the short term, we make a distinction between
[Guest]: the public and the private lives of Indians.
[Guest]: And we say, look, in a private life, you marry who you want.
[Guest]: If that means you marry somebody from your caste or your religion, that's your choice.
[Guest]: If you want to have lunch or dinner with people only, you know, commensuality, right, that's
[Guest]: the origin of jati, whatever, not origin, a key feature of jati, you eat, inter dining,
[Guest]: you don't want to do inter dining, you want to eat only your kind of food, your particularities,
[Guest]: you have every right.
[Guest]: But there is this thing called public sphere, it means voting, it means employment, right?
[Guest]: It means behavior of strangers in the street, right?
[Guest]: In those things, you have to behave like an individual, right?
[Guest]: So the best I think we can push for, right, is to say that there is this private life
[Guest]: and private sphere.
[Guest]: And if you want to be comfortable living a group life, go ahead.
[Guest]: But insofar as we have these public spheres and public lives, please don't think about
[Guest]: your caste, your religion, because you're all in it together.
[Guest]: Because just the nature of the group is all 1.4 billion Indians, right?
[Guest]: I would say that's a more achievable equilibrium than a Swiss society where everybody thinks
[Guest]: as individuals in India, which, you know, I just don't see, at least in our lifetimes,
[Guest]: that realistically happening, right?
[Guest]: And one thing we've seen with, you know, the old modernization theory was that with industrialization,
[Guest]: right, with the move from farm to factory, groups would kind of atomize and you'd move
[Guest]: from rural group based societies to individual urban societies.
[Guest]: You just haven't seen that, right?
[Guest]: And in that sense, Indian modernization looks more and more like Japanese modernization,
[Guest]: where you're able to both keep old traditions as well as reinvent new traditions of groups,
[Guest]: rather than move towards what the United States or Europe looks like, though, even there,
[Guest]: as we see now, group dynamics are playing a very big role.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, I'm glad you mentioned the word atomization, because people often use
[Amit Varma]: that to beat up on a straw man version of libertarianism, where they say, oh, you see
[Amit Varma]: the world as atomized individuals, all our connections will be lost and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And my response to that is no, you know, the world that I see is based on a respect of
[Amit Varma]: consent and voluntary action, you know, I see myself as an individual, but I'm, I'm
[Amit Varma]: a part of different communities of choice, I keep trying to reach out from different
[Amit Varma]: kinds of bonds.
[Amit Varma]: So that whole term atomization at some level, goes to that straw man argument, which people
[Amit Varma]: often kind of throw.
[Amit Varma]: But that was a delightful sort of diversion you took into that street from Bandra station
[Guest]: to Bandra reclamation.
[Guest]: I'll take I'll take you down that I'll take I mean, let's walk so and you'll see what
[Amit Varma]: I mean.
[Amit Varma]: Done, done.
[Amit Varma]: See, I mean, if this was on YouTube, the next shot would be we are in that lane.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me more about your childhood.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, where are you going to school?
[Amit Varma]: What's your vision of yourself at this point?
[Amit Varma]: What are the what do you read?
[Amit Varma]: What do you listen to?
[Amit Varma]: What is the sense of the texture of your days?
[Guest]: So you know, I used to go to school place to my 10th standard a school called Arya Vidya
[Guest]: Mandir Bandra.
[Guest]: That's where I spent seven to eight years of my life.
[Guest]: And you know, the joke, we went when my Narasimha Rao book came back, the joke I used to say
[Guest]: was, look, I went to a school where everybody knew Mahesh Bhatt's third or second wife,
[Guest]: nobody had heard of Narasimha Rao.
[Guest]: And I remember saying this at, you know, one particular event.
[Guest]: And the person who spoke after me was Vikram Bhatt, you know, who is, again, if my memory
[Guest]: serves Mahesh Bhatt's younger brother.
[Guest]: And he, you know, he began by saying, you know what, I have to be honest with you.
[Guest]: I didn't know who Narasimha Rao was, but I sure knew Mahesh Bhatt's second wife, you know.
[Guest]: So that was the school I went to, right.
[Guest]: It was a school in, you know, where it was an Arya Samaj school.
[Guest]: So we had a disproportionate number of Hindus, mainly Sindhis and Punjabis, you know, ex-refugees
[Guest]: or from ex-refugee families, who'd kind of made it, you know, in Khar, Bandra area, Santa
[Guest]: Cruz, those areas.
[Guest]: And we had a high proportion of Parsis because, you know, Arya Samaj worships fire.
[Guest]: And you know, Parsis said, okay, we also are happy worshipping fire.
[Guest]: So we had a disproportionate number of Parsis, right.
[Guest]: And it was an interesting school because, you know, my parents came from a professional
[Guest]: background.
[Guest]: My mother taught at Bombay University, she taught sociology.
[Guest]: And my dad was an IIT engineer, and he had his own consultancy, he had gone private.
[Guest]: But you know, most of my students came from business backgrounds, right?
[Guest]: Most of my fellow students.
[Guest]: So for example, around Bandra station, again, those of you are familiar with Bandra, you
[Guest]: have a series of jewellery shops, you know, where Hill Road meets Bandra station.
[Guest]: Lots of my classmates, you know, were scions of those jewellery shops, you know.
[Guest]: So it was a radically different world from those who come from a professional background,
[Guest]: you know, and it gave me a very, an instinct that look, I like to read books, but I'm very
[Guest]: familiar with the fact that other people don't read books, you know, and I like that diversity,
[Guest]: you know, that I don't want to only seek out people like me who, you know, who like books
[Guest]: and who, you know, who quote and, you know, like whatever, you know, the life of the mind.
[Guest]: Many people are not like that and all power to them, right?
[Guest]: And you know, what does it look like to grow up to inherit your father's jewellery business,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: What does it look like to grow up to inherit your father's Skoda business, Skoda car dealership
[Guest]: in Sakinaka?
[Guest]: So I had a pretty strong instinct for that, you know, and in that sense, I'm pretty happy
[Guest]: I didn't go to Delhi and, you know, a certain world in Delhi where, you know, I'd only be
[Guest]: hanging out with people like me.
[Guest]: I think this has given me a good instinct for people who are different.
[Guest]: Of course, you know, the class background was not heterogeneous, you know, people were
[Guest]: broadly wealthy and certainly most people were wealthier than my parents were.
[Guest]: But it, you know, it was certainly an interesting Khar, Bandra, you know, background, you know,
[Guest]: for example, the school, we used to go swimming as a school every week to Khar gym, right?
[Guest]: And I used to joke that Khar gym is the only place in the world where in the bar Sindhi
[Guest]: is the lingua franca, right?
[Guest]: That's, you know, Sindhi is the language that is spoken.
[Guest]: So it's a very different kind of deal.
[Guest]: And then after my 11th and 12th, I think my parents thought I was getting out of hand.
[Guest]: And I went to Rishi Valley school, which is a Jindu Krishnamoorthi school.
[Guest]: I mean, the stereotype of the school is, you know, you sit in on classes under a tree.
[Guest]: And I think that that stereotype says a lot about the school, two of the happiest years
[Guest]: of my life.
[Guest]: I'm very happy that I didn't go there throughout, because if I'd gone there throughout, I wouldn't
[Guest]: know how to cross a road with traffic, you know, because it's a it's a rural school,
[Guest]: you live, you know, in a, you know, in a pretty sort of, you know, inside baseball community.
[Guest]: And then I went to National Law School, Bangalore for five years.
[Guest]: So I, you know, I studied law.
[Guest]: And after that, you know, I found a lot of my students, a lot of my fellow students in
[Guest]: National Law School Bangalore were going to these fancy American universities, for what
[Guest]: we call an LLM or a master's in law, and places like Harvard, Yale, which was be out of reach
[Guest]: if I was even going to IIT.
[Guest]: And I just I applied because I thought it would be a good sixth year.
[Guest]: So I went to Harvard Law School, I spent one year and I think at that time, I had an epiphany
[Guest]: a myth, which is that if after going to Harvard Law School, I can't do what I love, then who
[Guest]: can do what they love, right?
[Guest]: And suddenly, all that pressure, everything mounted, right?
[Guest]: But who am I kidding, right?
[Guest]: If you know, after Harvard Law School, if I do something conventionally foolish, people
[Guest]: think I'm eccentric, not crazy.
[Guest]: And there's a world of a difference between both those those words, right?
[Guest]: Eccentric people are, you know, people with options who choose to do funny things.
[Guest]: Crazy people are just crazy, right?
[Guest]: And I asked myself a simple question saying, what do I like doing on weekends, right?
[Guest]: And I liked, you know, I used to follow Indian politics, I written a couple of peaches pieces
[Guest]: for Times of India and Hindu and just crafting writing and crafting the narrative on politics
[Guest]: is something that I found fun.
[Guest]: And I said, Look, this is what I clearly like doing when nobody's forcing me to do anything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: Let's see if I can make a career out of that.
[Guest]: And at that stage, I was quite keen to do a PhD in political science, I thought I would
[Guest]: get into Harvard, I didn't eventually, but I decided to take a bit of a break because
[Guest]: I didn't want to go degree from degree.
[Guest]: So I came back to India and work for some years with Indian Express, again, fascinating
[Guest]: time in Delhi, I was on the editorial pages.
[Guest]: So I was a sub editor, doing you know, cleaning copy, but I was also writing edits, and I
[Guest]: will occasionally do reporting pieces.
[Guest]: And that's when my I would say my love for journalists, right?
[Guest]: And you know, people who really are in the trenches, especially reporters, because the
[Guest]: thing with reporters is that, you know, you may spend a full day, right?
[Guest]: Seeing a story that only takes up 100 words, right?
[Guest]: But other than the 100 words, that entire experience you've had is within you.
[Guest]: And so when I used to meet older journalists, the euphemism, we use a senior journalist,
[Guest]: I would find that them to be rich with anecdotes rich with experiences.
[Guest]: I was also very lucky to meet Shekhar Gupta at that time, who has, you know, definitely
[Guest]: become a bit of a mentor, he may not know it, but, you know, at least from my end, because
[Guest]: I mean, many of your readers may see his cut the clutter, your viewers may see his cut
[Guest]: the clutter.
[Guest]: That's how he was to us that he would just walk to the journalist, and then he would
[Guest]: narrate incident after incident.
[Guest]: And that's when I learned the power of being able to talk about politics through a story,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And an emphasis on contemporary history.
[Guest]: So I think I owe him a lot.
[Guest]: I also, you know, was very grateful to get to know Raj Kamal Jha, who's also a very well
[Guest]: known author.
[Guest]: But he brought a certain aesthetic and discipline to writing that I've learned a lot from.
[Guest]: And you know, again, maybe I'm just ranting here Amit, but you know, my time in Delhi
[Guest]: is a bit of Alice in Wonderland, right?
[Guest]: And I completely agree with the criticism of Lutyens Delhi that there are a bunch of
[Guest]: privileged, you know, ex ISO officers kids, right?
[Guest]: That's a correct, I mean, like all stereotypes, of course, there are many people not like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But that stereotype, the Arnab stereotype has a kernel of truth to it, right?
[Guest]: And amidst that people like Shekhar Gupta and Raj Kamal Jha who are genuinely talented,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: It's very rare to find and when I found them, I was like, I used to stick to them, right?
[Guest]: And that's the one thing I learned that it's important to pick your mentors, right?
[Guest]: And Raj just the aesthetics of writing Raj told me never use the word I when you write
[Guest]: because very powerful.
[Guest]: So use it sparingly only when that I is going the word I is going to make a difference.
[Guest]: I follow that in both my books, no I, right?
[Guest]: This third person because you know what, I'm a boring person here, because you're asking
[Guest]: me I'm telling you about the street, etc, etc.
[Guest]: But quite honestly, I came here prepared to talk about Narsimha Rao, not myself.
[Guest]: Because frankly, the subject is much more important than you are.
[Guest]: And yeah, and after that, I spent six years in Princeton, doing a PhD in political science,
[Guest]: I learned how to write a book, a book length project, I learned how to research.
[Guest]: It was fascinating, but I was always very sure I wanted to come back to India.
[Guest]: And I would have come back to frankly, Indian Express and journalism, at least that's what
[Guest]: I told them.
[Guest]: But luckily, you know, this Ashoka University was opening up.
[Guest]: And now that I'm there, I don't want to be anywhere else.
[Guest]: I mean, I get five months a year off to do my own research.
[Guest]: It's an unbeatable proposition.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, many strands I want to follow.
[Amit Varma]: But before all of them, you know, you mentioned being in that school surrounded by kids or
[Amit Varma]: business people and filmy people who know the parts more than Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: One of the buts was close to my age group.
[Guest]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: Pooja's brother.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul Bhatt.
[Amit Varma]: The friend of Headley.
[Amit Varma]: Rahul.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: He was my physical trainer at a gym I went to for a brief while.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: He was also David Headley's physical trainer.
[Amit Varma]: That's how they got to know each other.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that's what David Headley and I have in common.
[Amit Varma]: Though I have to clarify, I never knew David Headley.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, I think circa 2001-2002, I used to go to the gym in Marine Drive where Rahul
[Amit Varma]: was my trainer.
[Amit Varma]: So I just finished reading this fascinating book that I'd recommend to all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: called Wanting by Luke Burgess.
[Amit Varma]: Abhijit Bhaduri had recommended it to me in the episode we did together and I picked it
[Amit Varma]: up subsequently.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a superb book.
[Amit Varma]: And the central thesis of the book is that most of what we want is not some inner desire.
[Amit Varma]: It is imitative.
[Amit Varma]: It is mimetic, in a sense, we look at what the people around us want.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, we adopt their desires to become our desires.
[Amit Varma]: Burgess's sort of realization was based on like this line of thinking about wanting and
[Amit Varma]: desire came from a philosopher called Rene Girard.
[Amit Varma]: And Rene Girard, I think a few decades ago, was asked to teach a class on literature.
[Amit Varma]: And he wasn't a literature guy, but he agreed to teach the class because he needed the money.
[Amit Varma]: And then as he read all these books, he found in them a thread that had not that he that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, other people who taught literature hadn't spoken about, which was basically that
[Amit Varma]: in all these novels and books and all that he read, all the characters seem to want something
[Amit Varma]: not intrinsically, but because some someone around them wanted it or they were expected
[Amit Varma]: to want it, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where the great tragedies took place.
[Amit Varma]: And the concept I was left with from Burgess's book was one about reflecting why we want
[Amit Varma]: what we want, and two about the distinction between thick desires and thin desires, right?
[Amit Varma]: And thin desires being sort of relatively superficial desires, which may be really intense,
[Amit Varma]: but which are which you've still picked up from somewhere else, and they're not intrinsic
[Amit Varma]: to you that, oh, I want a Mercedes C class, or I want this or I want that I want to go
[Amit Varma]: on a holiday there, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And you think you want that, but you probably want that because of a bunch of other factors.
[Amit Varma]: And intrinsically, you don't really want that and thick desires, on the other hand, would
[Amit Varma]: be what you intrinsically want.
[Amit Varma]: That's who you really are.
[Amit Varma]: And I found this a very good frame to just examine my own life and my own choices and
[Amit Varma]: think about the things that I wanted, and why did I want that, like I was reading this
[Amit Varma]: book sort of on vacation, this is a bit of a digression, but there is a sport called
[Amit Varma]: match poker, not quite like poker, but something like it.
[Amit Varma]: And I won the national championship there with my team a couple of times, I was part
[Amit Varma]: of Team India, we went and we won the Asian championship.
[Amit Varma]: And then recently, last month, we went to the World Championship, where all the teams
[Amit Varma]: that we had thrashed in the Asian championship finished ahead of us.
[Amit Varma]: It was pretty devastating for various reasons, like regular team members had visas rejected
[Amit Varma]: and all kinds of shit happened.
[Amit Varma]: And I was while reading this book thinking about okay, why was I so upset?
[Amit Varma]: And that you know, the reason like the first reason I got drawn to that particular form
[Amit Varma]: of poker as it were, is because it was so different from poker that you had to work
[Amit Varma]: it out from first principles and there was an intellectual challenge.
[Amit Varma]: So the intellectual challenge drew me in.
[Amit Varma]: But most of the devastation that I felt was because I wanted the glory of winning a World
[Amit Varma]: Championship with Team India, even though I've already won an Asian championship with
[Amit Varma]: them, right?
[Amit Varma]: And why did I want that?
[Amit Varma]: Is it something so intrinsic?
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's part of most of our desire for validation is completely unnecessary and
[Guest]: pointless.
[Guest]: And most of them are thin not thick.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, most of them are thin not thick.
[Amit Varma]: And this was a thin desire.
[Amit Varma]: And I have thicker desires.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that you avoided a trap here.
[Amit Varma]: Because when you went to that school, it is quite possible that you could have, you know,
[Amit Varma]: picked up desires or things that you wanted to do, which were thin desires from the people
[Amit Varma]: around you from the milieu around you.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, even when you did law, perhaps you go down certain paths, because they are
[Amit Varma]: great parts.
[Amit Varma]: Everybody wants them.
[Amit Varma]: Howard Law School, like who would turn that down.
[Amit Varma]: But luckily, you said you had that epiphany.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm presuming that what happened next, that process of seeking truth by doing the
[Amit Varma]: reporter's job by engaging with the world and everything that you've been doing.
[Amit Varma]: That's a thick desire.
[Amit Varma]: So if you sort of reflect on this journey of yours, you know, but does any of this make
[Amit Varma]: sense?
[Amit Varma]: Were there thin desires before you found?
[Guest]: It makes a lot of sense.
[Guest]: Of course, there were thin, makes a lot of sense.
[Guest]: That is very clarifying, Amit.
[Guest]: So definitely there are thin desires.
[Guest]: Of course, the problem with thin desires is you realize them too late, right?
[Guest]: That you think they are thick desires, right?
[Guest]: You think that there's something intrinsic and later you said, no, this is not what I
[Guest]: really wanted, or I was I was influenced.
[Guest]: So you know, so I definitely see that.
[Guest]: But I think that at Howard Law School was an epiphany in that it told me that I didn't
[Guest]: have to play the thin desire game, you know, that, you know, I should ask myself, what's
[Guest]: the thick desire?
[Guest]: And to me, the thick desire is what you do on weekends, you know, and is there a way
[Guest]: to monetize that?
[Guest]: I mean, look, I'm not crazy.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I, you know, I have to make my own way in the world and I have to, you
[Guest]: know, pay for myself.
[Guest]: So, you know, what can I do, which is, which links my thick desire, what I like to do on
[Guest]: Saturday, Sunday, into, you know, being able to provide a, you know, a good livelihood
[Guest]: for myself and my family, right?
[Guest]: That you know, but so I think that gave me the epiphany until then, I definitely back
[Guest]: of the mind, I have this thing that, you know, I have to, you know, I have to succeed in
[Guest]: the way society defines success.
[Guest]: And after studying in National Law School, Bangalore and Howard Law School, that way
[Guest]: was actually pretty simple, which was to get a corporate law job and work on Wall Street.
[Guest]: There was actually various and I did interview for some of them.
[Guest]: But I had a second epiphany while at Harvard Law School, I took this course called it was
[Guest]: I think Introduction to Corporate Law, or 101 Corporate Law by this professor called
[Guest]: Guhan Subramaniam, who was a joint appointment between Harvard Business School and Harvard
[Guest]: Law School.
[Guest]: And he was superb.
[Guest]: He was absolutely brilliant.
[Guest]: And I worked my ass off and I still got I think a B or a B plus.
[Guest]: And I think that was another epiphany because it told me that corporate law was not meant
[Guest]: for me that, you know, if I have the best teacher in the world, and I work really hard,
[Guest]: I'm still not good at it.
[Guest]: So why should I waste a career doing that?
[Guest]: You know, I think that and by the way, I, you know, a lot of my students who I teach
[Guest]: and who I give a B or a B minus, I tell this story to saying that, look, it's a signal,
[Guest]: it means that if you didn't work hard, it's a signal to work hard.
[Guest]: If you worked hard, it means that perhaps this kind of course is not meant for you.
[Guest]: And that's a good thing, because there are a million courses out there, the million things
[Guest]: you can do, right.
[Guest]: So actually knowing what you're not good at is a good thing.
[Guest]: So yeah, so I think that but thanks for clarifying that Amit, you put it better than I could.
[Amit Varma]: Luke Burgess put it better than either of us could, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I was thinking of the same thing when I read your book on Narasimha Rao and we'll
[Amit Varma]: talk about the book in detail later.
[Amit Varma]: But this strand about what do you want and why do you want it also struck me because
[Amit Varma]: in many ways, it seems to me that Narasimha Rao was a puppet of circumstance, you know,
[Amit Varma]: getting married at the age of 10.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you've written here, quote, Rao would later describe his arranged marriage
[Amit Varma]: as an act beyond his control as so much of his later life would be.
[Amit Varma]: He was, quote, within quotes, disappointed, but not shocked.
[Amit Varma]: His inner self remained unaffected, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And later you talk about how he became and how, you know, there was a pull to academics.
[Amit Varma]: And he had once said that had he not been a politician, he would have been an academic
[Amit Varma]: in Oxford or Cambridge.
[Amit Varma]: At another point, you write about choosing politics, where you write, quote, his choice
[Amit Varma]: of a career in politics was not an affirmation, merely the preclusion of other alternatives.
[Amit Varma]: In other words, he was a hopeless midfield, but a mundane existence would have driven
[Amit Varma]: him mad, stop quote, which is again resonant.
[Amit Varma]: And so you look at Rao's life, and he's a product of circumstance and serendipity in
[Amit Varma]: so many ways, rising in power as a compromise candidate, because he hadn't chosen a tribe,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you know, whether it's his becoming chief minister or later prime minister and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But at a deeper level on the subject of wanting, it kind of made me think that there is an
[Amit Varma]: inner mystery there.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps what he wanted was the life of scholarship, of reading and writing.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, he did write that semi autobiographical novel.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, he was trying to write it in the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: But politics called him back when, you know, Indira Gandhi got him to Delhi as a general
[Amit Varma]: secretary.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and one thing that is fairly obvious and almost a banal observation as
[Amit Varma]: we are, of course, all creatures of circumstance, you know, whether it's a circumstance of the
[Amit Varma]: genes we happen to have all the things that happened to us, that's right.
[Amit Varma]: But in terms of wanting is our wanting what we want also, perhaps, a matter of circumstance
[Amit Varma]: like the other thing that you point out with Narsimha Rao was that he did want political
[Amit Varma]: power that he did in a way, pull strings and maneuver and try to, you know, lie and bribe
[Amit Varma]: all of that, you know, to become prime minister when he did to become president in 82 when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Zia-ul-Singh was chosen instead, and again later when Venkatraman was chosen
[Amit Varma]: instead.
[Amit Varma]: So he did want that power, even though he was, in a sense, an accidental politician.
[Amit Varma]: So just I think one way of looking at lives and reading lives is also as a web of desires
[Amit Varma]: and trying to figure out where they come from and what they do to you.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just thinking aloud, this is a bit of a ramble, but what are your thoughts?
[Guest]: No, I think that's, you know, that's quite illuminating.
[Guest]: I hope, by the way, you didn't structure just to say that my musings are equivalent to Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao's musings as he grows up, you know, because I certainly haven't thought of it that way.
[Guest]: The way I thought of Narsimha Rao is as follows, you know, I mean, an uncle of mine who has
[Guest]: had a huge influence on my life has always tells me this, which is that God gives you
[Guest]: a certain set of cards, right?
[Guest]: Some of them are aces, some of them are not.
[Guest]: The question is how well you play those cards and as a poker player that, you know, must
[Guest]: resonate with you, right?
[Guest]: I think Narsimha Rao had a very early epiphany that he can't control the cards dealt to him,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: He's married at the age of 10.
[Guest]: He's married at the age of 10, right?
[Guest]: You know, his family around him is illiterate, semi-literate.
[Guest]: The family around him is semi-illiterate, right?
[Guest]: What he can control is what he can do with those cards, right?
[Guest]: So yes, the family around him is semi-literate, but he's a precocious student.
[Guest]: He loves learning.
[Guest]: So his father sees that and sends him to a school in a different village, even if it
[Guest]: means that Narsimha Rao is cut off from the rest of his family, right?
[Guest]: And by the way, this is a learning that is hugely helpful to him when he becomes prime
[Guest]: minister.
[Guest]: You know, look at the cards that are dealt to him, right?
[Guest]: One is India is facing the biggest economic crisis, you know, it has ever faced arguably,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: The Berlin Wall has collapsed, so India's best friend in the global stage, Soviet Union
[Guest]: is kind of withdrawing, right?
[Guest]: India has secession issues in Assam, Kashmir and Punjab.
[Guest]: In fact, I think in Kashmir and Punjab, if my memory serves, elections couldn't even
[Guest]: be held when Narsimha Rao became prime minister, right?
[Guest]: And his Congress predecessor has been murdered by the LTT, that's Rajiv Gandhi.
[Guest]: These are the cards that he's been dealt with, right?
[Guest]: And look at the other set of cards dealt with him, right?
[Guest]: He is not popular in his own party, his party is not a majority in Parliament, right?
[Guest]: He lacks individual charisma, God has not given him charisma, and he has to in some
[Guest]: sense report to Sonia Gandhi.
[Guest]: These are the cards dealt to him, right?
[Guest]: The question is, how do you play it?
[Guest]: And the argument of the book is he played it better than anyone could have played it
[Guest]: in those five years, right?
[Guest]: So I think that realization he has from a very early age that there are tons and tons
[Guest]: of things outside his control.
[Guest]: And he's not, you know, he's not going to die on that hill.
[Guest]: He's not going to complain, God, why did you do this to me?
[Guest]: He's not going to do that.
[Guest]: Given the situation, he's going to make the best of the cards that have been given
[Guest]: to him.
[Guest]: And I think that's an early childhood realization that Narsimha Rao inherits.
[Guest]: And I would argue that that's his core skill set, to know when to lose, to know when to
[Guest]: win and to know when to cheat, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And there's also sort of a poignancy to the metaphor you made with poker and the cards
[Amit Varma]: you're dealt.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, in poker, what happens is that, you know, that even though it's a
[Amit Varma]: game of skill, luck plays a huge part.
[Amit Varma]: The quantum of luck is much more than in other sports, you know, I play 100 points of tennis
[Amit Varma]: with Nadal, I will lose all 100.
[Amit Varma]: But if, you know, you take the best poker player in the world, and he plays a newcomer
[Amit Varma]: who just knows the rules, it's going to be more like 52-48.
[Amit Varma]: So what you need for skill to express itself is volume.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't play one hand, you play hundreds and thousands and really a decent sample size
[Amit Varma]: in poker would perhaps be 100,000 or more.
[Guest]: That's interesting.
[Guest]: I didn't think of that.
[Amit Varma]: And in life, you don't have that.
[Amit Varma]: You don't have a sample size in life, you can't put in volume.
[Amit Varma]: As the phrase goes, you get that one hand, you do with it what you can.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting through the course of the book to see how that worked out, how that
[Amit Varma]: worked out with his marriage, where they did stay together in a way for 40 years, have
[Amit Varma]: kids and all of that, but also had independent lives outside of that, or rather he did she'd,
[Amit Varma]: you know, couldn't so much because just the privilege of being male, I guess.
[Amit Varma]: And then even later, like, I completely agree with, you know, what he achieved during his
[Amit Varma]: five years, like you mentioned in the book that quote, in terms of the quantum of transformation
[Amit Varma]: brought about, Rao ranks with other 20th century revolutionary figures such as Nehru, Deng Xiaoping,
[Amit Varma]: FDR, Reagan, Thatcher, and Charles de Gaulle.
[Amit Varma]: But the difference you point out is that none of them faced all of these obstacles, which
[Amit Varma]: you just outlined, and he alone faced them and he made the most of the cards.
[Amit Varma]: And another way of looking at that is that, you know, when he was Home Minister, when
[Amit Varma]: the Sikh riots happened, you outlined it in your book in detail, that it's fashionable
[Amit Varma]: now to blame him and say he was a Home Minister, the riots happened.
[Amit Varma]: But as you say, what really happened was that he was given a message at a point in time
[Amit Varma]: that now all reports of this and the control of the police will be with the PM or with
[Amit Varma]: the Prime Minister's office.
[Amit Varma]: And those are the cards he's dealt.
[Guest]: But by the way, I do say that I think he played it badly, right, in the sense, I call it his
[Guest]: vilest hour.
[Guest]: You do.
[Guest]: That's what I call it.
[Guest]: Because those were so he was held a bad set of cards.
[Guest]: He was given a direct order by the PMO to stand down.
[Guest]: And that even though he was Home Minister and in Delhi, the Delhi police report to the
[Guest]: Home Minister, he was told on the day that Indira Gandhi died, that there would be riots
[Guest]: the next day and police will report directly to the PMO.
[Guest]: So he was held a bad, he was dealt a bad set of cards.
[Guest]: If he had protested, he would have had to resign and his career would have been over
[Guest]: in the Congress.
[Guest]: But he could have done that, right?
[Guest]: He chose to protect his career over preventing genocide of innocent Sikhs, right?
[Guest]: And I would, I would judge him harshly.
[Guest]: But yes, he was dealt a bad set of cards there, no doubt about it.
[Amit Varma]: I would, I agree with you in terms of it being his vilest hours and one has to judge him
[Amit Varma]: harshly.
[Amit Varma]: But what he did there was consistent with what you point out he did in all the other
[Amit Varma]: situations where rather than argue against the cards dealt to him, he just accepted it
[Amit Varma]: and ensured his own survival within the system.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in that sense, he was being as rational at that moment as he was after 91, where he
[Guest]: did everything he did, where he was completely masterful.
[Guest]: I think that's right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So it's an example of how, you know, people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: It is so easy to praise, praise Narsimha Rao as India's best Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: And as you point out in your book, Arun Jaitley does.
[Guest]: Arun Jaitley is India's best Congress Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, that's what he said.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, condemn him for his inaction in 84, for example.
[Amit Varma]: In the same way, you know, I think Vajpayee was a damn good Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: And there are other things that you can condemn him for as well.
[Amit Varma]: So people contain multitudes and Nehru as well, ditto.
[Amit Varma]: There are things you can condemn him for and there are things you have to praise him for.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come back to Narsimha Rao later.
[Amit Varma]: But in that personal journey, there were other strands I wanted to pick up on and one was,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about gaining a particular aesthetic and an approach from Raj Kamal Jha, who, by
[Amit Varma]: the way, also contains multitudes because I absolutely hated his first book, The Blue
[Amit Varma]: Bedspread.
[Amit Varma]: I thought it was purple, ornate prose and, you know, maybe the mimetic desire to write
[Amit Varma]: like Arundhati Roy, who was, you know, who wrote similar ornate purple prose, except
[Amit Varma]: that he seemed almost a parody, but obviously a great journalist and editor from everything
[Amit Varma]: that I've heard.
[Amit Varma]: I've never met him.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about the influence he had on you, like the bit about the I I
[Amit Varma]: completely get in journalism, there has to be no I. I focus a lot on getting my guests
[Amit Varma]: to use the I because that personal journey is really for me what brings the show alive.
[Amit Varma]: And what makes each of my guests more than an expert on a subject, but an actual human
[Amit Varma]: being on a journey.
[Amit Varma]: So I aim for the personal, but in the journalistic context, you know, I can, you know, I totally
[Amit Varma]: agree with Raj there.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about, you know, figuring out in terms of aesthetic, in terms
[Amit Varma]: of approach, in terms of ethic, how he influenced you and how you changed?
[Guest]: Well, firstly, definitely the I, right, and the I is also deeper in the sense that what
[Guest]: he constantly instilled in me was that the subject is greater than the observer, you
[Guest]: know, and he's in doing so he's rebelling against a recent fashion, which says that
[Guest]: because the observer cannot be detached from the observed, let's talk about the observer
[Guest]: instead, right?
[Guest]: That's what happens.
[Guest]: And I look academia's full of this stuff, right?
[Guest]: Because you need to be sort of self reflective or self self reflexive.
[Guest]: It just becomes like a, you know, sort of an ego massage, that actually, you should
[Guest]: be writing about tribals in Jharkhand.
[Guest]: But, you know, you're talking about your caste privilege, class privilege, gender privilege,
[Guest]: but actually that, you know, there's a way in which that becomes talking about yourself,
[Guest]: I don't want to know about you, I want to know about the tribals in Jharkhand, right?
[Guest]: So he, so I think he really pushed me into, you know, take realize that the subject that
[Guest]: what you're seeing what you're reporting is much more important than you are, of course,
[Guest]: you have bias and be a little aware of it, but don't be so aware of it, that that becomes
[Guest]: a center of the story rather than what you are seeing, you know, I think the second thing
[Guest]: that Raj has instilled in me, you know, look, you know, he won't consciously call himself
[Guest]: a mentor.
[Guest]: But you know, I would say that it's a one way I've learned a lot from him, is that the
[Guest]: art of telling a story, you know, that what it means to tell a story, what it means to
[Guest]: talk about the interiority of people, right, to give you one example, in the BJP book,
[Guest]: which is what we talked about in the last episode, the book, you know, consciously ends
[Guest]: with Modi's ascension on the national stage.
[Guest]: And it's about, you know, Vajpayee and Advani's life and through them, we get to know Hindu
[Guest]: nationalism before Modi.
[Guest]: But Raj, you know, when I was talking to him while researching the book had a very interesting
[Guest]: point he said, look, everybody reading the book will be reading the book backwards in
[Guest]: the sense they will be reading the book knowing that Modi is in power today, that Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: is hegemonic today.
[Guest]: And knowing this, they are looking at the at the past.
[Guest]: So you can't like go ahead and write the story of the past pretending that there's no Modi,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So it has to lead up to Modi, it shouldn't be about Modi, it has to lead up to Modi,
[Guest]: but it should be well aware and sensitive to the fact that the story only makes sense
[Guest]: for people reading today, given that they're obsessed about Modi, they're obsessed about
[Guest]: Hindu nationalism, right?
[Guest]: And he gave me this example of this book that he had liked a lot, which is by Lawrence Wright.
[Guest]: I think it's called the Looming Tower, right?
[Amit Varma]: A super book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I haven't read the book, but I'll paraphrase what he told me.
[Guest]: And he told me that, look, it's the story of Al-Qaeda until 9-11, right?
[Guest]: So that isn't that right?
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: But everybody reading it is reading the story of Al-Qaeda given 9-11.
[Guest]: So how do you, you know, and it's a bit of a balancing act, because, you know, everything
[Guest]: that Osama does, you know, in the 1990s, shouldn't be, you know, saying that, ah, this is what
[Guest]: he did.
[Guest]: And therefore, this helps 9-11 make sense, because that's a bit too reductionist.
[Guest]: On the other hand, that's what the reader cares about.
[Guest]: So how do you make that balancing act, right?
[Guest]: And his answer to that, by the way, Raj's answer, and I really appreciate that, is often
[Guest]: more aesthetic than it is analytical.
[Guest]: So it's a treatment of a story, rather than the facts or the narration of the story, right?
[Guest]: I've learned a lot from him about that.
[Guest]: The third thing I've learned, which is, I think, the most important thing is that, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, Indian Express under him, he's now the editor in chief, makes a conscious
[Guest]: effort to not be left wing or right wing, right?
[Guest]: Because it feels that the complex story is actually in the middle.
[Guest]: So it's, you know, it's very critical of Modi, Indian Express houses Pratap Bhanu Mehta,
[Guest]: who's I would say, the arguably the most famous Modi critic in India.
[Guest]: And it has gotten him into enormous trouble, not least in my own university, which is shameful.
[Guest]: But it's certainly not right wing.
[Guest]: It's not a left wing paper, either, it gives plenty of space to Ram Madhav, you know, it's
[Guest]: quite critical of cancel culture, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And even when it comes to Modi, it's critical of Modi, it also says that there's, you know,
[Guest]: tons of things that Modi does right, like the welfare schemes, for example.
[Guest]: And it, you know, and, and I think that has to do in part with Raj's aesthetic of focusing
[Guest]: on the middle, and on the complexities in the middle, right, and I've certainly for
[Guest]: both my books, have taken some of that aesthetic, which is that look, it's a really boring question
[Guest]: to say, I want to write a book, which says that Modi is the son of God, right?
[Guest]: Or I want to write a book saying Modi is the son of Hitler, I mean, those are terrible
[Guest]: books to read, right?
[Guest]: The complexity of the story is somewhere in between and being able to tell that story,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And being able to draw people from the left and the right to engage with you, regardless
[Guest]: of their ideological beliefs by saying that, look, I have my own sensibility, right?
[Guest]: But the facts that I'm telling you, and the story that I'm telling you is honestly done,
[Guest]: and adds value to you, even if you don't agree with my ideological position.
[Guest]: And I think, you know, looking back, some of that comes from both, you know, what Raj
[Guest]: is doing with Indian Express, and frankly, what Shekhar Gupta is doing with the print,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Which is it infuriates people on the left, it infuriates people on the right.
[Guest]: But it tries its best to do what you said, which is to resist categorization.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I absolutely agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, like, one of the small tips I give my writing students in one of my webinars
[Amit Varma]: is about how when you're writing an op-ed or an opinion piece, you want to engage with
[Amit Varma]: the opposite argument and not a strawman, but the best version of the opposite argument.
[Amit Varma]: And what it does, and there's a tactical reason for this, what it does is that today, what
[Amit Varma]: has happened on social media is you have vocal minorities, consisting of tribes.
[Amit Varma]: And within these tribes, you have people raising their stature by attacking the people in other
[Amit Varma]: tribes by attacking people in their own tribes for not being pure enough, and never addressing
[Amit Varma]: arguments.
[Amit Varma]: And these are extremely vocal.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems like everybody is like this, but these are minorities.
[Amit Varma]: The vast silent majority of people realize that everything is complicated, and they are
[Amit Varma]: confused and they want to figure shit out.
[Amit Varma]: So if you go there with the attitude that everything is complicated, here's what I think
[Amit Varma]: and here's why.
[Amit Varma]: And here's why I think the other point of view is wrong.
[Amit Varma]: And you take that intellectually honest approach, you get a lot more credibility and you have
[Amit Varma]: a lot, you have a much better chance of convincing readers, because they haven't immediately
[Amit Varma]: pegged you as partisan.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's so easy to tell who's preaching to the choir, and who's not in a sense.
[Guest]: I want to sort of go back to that, you know, I want to add to that, that, you know, it's
[Guest]: not just that readers are getting irritated when people are partisan, readers get and
[Guest]: viewers and in your case, listeners get irritated with moral preachiness, yeah, which is that,
[Guest]: you know, somebody beginning with the moral high ground and telling you, you have to agree
[Guest]: with me, otherwise, you're a bad person, you know, and it irritates the shit out of readers
[Guest]: and viewers and listeners, right?
[Guest]: And but they just feel so bullied that they can't even say it, right?
[Guest]: And I think that you confront a viewer or a listener or a reader with saying, look,
[Guest]: this is a point of view, these are the facts, right?
[Guest]: But hey, no pressure, man, make up your own mind, look at it your own way and come to
[Guest]: your own conclusion.
[Guest]: And you know what, you presume I'm a good person, I presume you're a good person, you
[Guest]: know, and I find that a much more refreshing attitude and frankly, a much more honest attitude.
[Amit Varma]: And a much more healthy attitude.
[Amit Varma]: And so sort of going back to the second of the three learnings that you said you had
[Amit Varma]: from Raj Kamal Jain, one of them was that people who read your book, which is about
[Amit Varma]: the BJP before Modi, will read it knowing the ending.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, in some way, the narrative has to play to that play to the ending.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure I'm and again, I'm just thinking aloud, and no doubt you've thought this through
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure that that's always the best approach to take in the sense that if you think about
[Amit Varma]: the world in probabilistic ways, there can be many outcomes today from where we are,
[Amit Varma]: it seems that Modi was inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: But in 1980, or in 1988, or in 1992, when Modi wasn't necessarily inevitable at any
[Amit Varma]: of those points in time, like if you think of the world in probabilistic way, like how
[Amit Varma]: I explain it is that, imagine you're flipping a coin, and there's a 50% probability.
[Amit Varma]: And as you flip it, there are two parallel universes which form and in one universe,
[Amit Varma]: its heads in the other universe's tails, and so on down the line for infinite parallel
[Amit Varma]: universes of which we occupy only one.
[Amit Varma]: And with the benefit of hindsight, we behave that whatever happened was inevitable, but
[Amit Varma]: actually, it wasn't, you know, and I wonder if thinking of what has happened as inevitable
[Amit Varma]: can lead you to the trap of sort of then framing history in a way that it leads to this and
[Amit Varma]: exactly this, like, for example, Keshava Guha has made the point earlier and that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: if Pramod Mahajan hadn't died, for example, you know, within the BJP, or if within the
[Amit Varma]: Congress, people like Madhavraj Shindia and Jitendra Prasad and Rajesh Palit hadn't died,
[Amit Varma]: maybe politics would be completely different today.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe Mahajan would be PM and maybe there'd be a real opposition in the Congress instead
[Amit Varma]: of what we have now.
[Amit Varma]: So all of those possibilities are open.
[Amit Varma]: But if you, you know, keep the reader in mind that the reader knows the end, I mean, isn't
[Guest]: that a danger?
[Guest]: No, firstly, I completely agree with you, right?
[Guest]: Which is that it's deeply wrong to think about the present as inevitable, right?
[Guest]: In fact, both my books on Narsimha Rao and on the BJP, the central point of both books
[Guest]: is that these were contingent affairs, that these were demand side, they were the journey
[Guest]: shaped the destination that we have to know the 100 years of the BJP to get to today,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because each of those years shape, you know, the way we came to today, right?
[Guest]: And it wasn't inevitable.
[Guest]: I focus a lot, you know, critics say a bit too much on personalities, right?
[Guest]: But to me, personalities are important, because they are full of like what you the example
[Guest]: you just gave by Keshav Goa on, you know, Pramod Mahajan dying or Madhavraj Shindia
[Guest]: dying, what effect it has on the Congress.
[Guest]: So I completely hear you on that.
[Guest]: I think what Raj meant and what I took from him was not that the reader should first be
[Guest]: told that the present today, this is the only journey that could have happened.
[Guest]: It is that that's there in the back of their mind while they are reading your book.
[Guest]: So you have to address it, right?
[Guest]: Again, I haven't read Looming Tower, but my impression is that Lawrence Wright is not
[Guest]: arguing that it was inevitable that the towers would fall.
[Guest]: It is that the reader reading me about the various contingent events that leading up
[Guest]: to the fall of the Twin Towers is having both the towers in the back of her mind or back
[Guest]: of his mind.
[Guest]: And I have to be respectful of that.
[Guest]: I can't pretend that that didn't happen because that's what the readers and the viewers and
[Guest]: listeners are seeing.
[Guest]: That's what I've taken, you know, I've kept in mind like for the Narsimha Rao book, you
[Guest]: know, a very important fact that, you know, I didn't want to hide away from was that Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao has been shamefully treated today, right?
[Guest]: That's the reality of today that he's been erased.
[Guest]: And I wanted you to, you know, I wanted to keep the reader, the one thing in the mind
[Guest]: of the reader that when I, you know, the reader is probably asking, hey, why do you want to
[Guest]: write 300 pages on this guy, right?
[Guest]: Nobody's going to say that on Vajpayee Advani, but plenty of people would have said that
[Guest]: about Narsimha Rao and I have to be sensitive to that, right?
[Guest]: And I think that's what I took from that, that, you know, the reader is looking at the
[Guest]: present and then reading your book, right?
[Guest]: So be respectful for that, but don't pander to the prejudice that the present is an inevitable
[Guest]: consequence of the past.
[Amit Varma]: Very well said.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, if you're listening to this in India, then I think you, you know, no matter
[Amit Varma]: who you are or where you are, you owe a debt to Narsimha Rao in some way.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, what he did in those five years is just apart from the bare facts of lifting
[Guest]: hundreds of millions of people, I mean, if you have a mobile phone, thank Narsimha Rao,
[Guest]: like forget like any complicated thing, right?
[Guest]: You know, if you drive on a road with a public private partnership, a lot of high quality,
[Guest]: you know, toll roads are like that, thank Narsimha Rao, right?
[Amit Varma]: But sorry, go on and on and on.
[Amit Varma]: And for many people, if you have food on the plate, because he got hundreds of millions
[Amit Varma]: of people, literally, it sounds like just a number, right?
[Amit Varma]: But hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, I mean, it's just such a profound
[Amit Varma]: consequence, and it's not necessarily the case that it would have happened anyway.
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Guest]: So, you know, as your book also kind of makes clear, which is why I'm totally with you that
[Guest]: I don't want to give the impression that there's a straight line between the past and the present.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, it could have gone in various different directions, as you pointed out in
[Amit Varma]: your book.
[Amit Varma]: And I hadn't realized this, but I was so alarmed when I read that little bit about how Pranam
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee was trying to angle for the finance minister position, when Manmohan became the
[Guest]: minister.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, can you imagine?
[Amit Varma]: It would have been a catastrophe.
[Amit Varma]: You know, because he was a catastrophe, eventually, when he got to the post in 2009.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: There is a straight line before his finance ministership in the 80s, where he encouraged,
[Guest]: you know, reliance style crony capitalism, and his finance ministership, you know, in
[Guest]: the waning years of the UPA, where, once again, you know, it was old style crony capitalism.
[Guest]: I mean, your listeners would remember what he did to Vodafone, for example, it's absolute
[Guest]: catastrophe.
[Unknown]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: And by the way, that's not the only catastrophe.
[Guest]: Imagine if, so Pranam Mukherjee was a long shot, right, as even as finance minister he
[Guest]: was a long shot, because, you know, he had been sort of expelled, or he had left the
[Guest]: Congress under Rajiv and had come back and was being rehabilitated by Narasimha Rao.
[Guest]: But imagine if N.D. Tiwari, remember him, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you know, that, frankly, that, you know, he was a more likely candidate,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Or Sharad Pawar, right?
[Guest]: It would have been crony capitalism.
[Guest]: These are, you know, this, and it was within a whisker of happening.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: That's just such a fascinating period of time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's go back to your getting to history, for example.
[Amit Varma]: I'm curious about that shift now from journalism to history, because part of that epiphany
[Amit Varma]: that you had in Harvard Law School was, you like reporting, you like that kind of life,
[Amit Varma]: you like writing about stuff and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Where does the shift to actually writing history happen from there?
[Amit Varma]: And what does it mean that you have taken this unconventional route to writing history
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that, you know, whenever I talk to academic historians, I get this little
[Amit Varma]: sense of resentment against the likes of even Ram Goha and Manu Pillai, who are not traditional
[Guest]: historians, right?
[Guest]: They kind of come from outside.
[Guest]: Most, by the way, most or many academic historians resent Ram Goha and 99% of that is just sheer
[Guest]: envy.
[Guest]: Because he sells more than them.
[Guest]: And when they tell ordinary people, you know, people who are not academics, I'm a historian
[Guest]: on India or South Asia, they say, oh, like Ram Goha, and they burn, they burn when they
[Guest]: heard that sentence.
[Amit Varma]: And not only does he sell more than them, he also writes better than them.
[Amit Varma]: So frankly, it's just, you know, plain causality happening there.
[Guest]: So I have one gripe, you know, with Ram, and I've told him this many times, which is that,
[Guest]: you know, his books are rich in primary sources, which is the most important thing, but they
[Guest]: lack respect for secondary sources.
[Guest]: Look on Gandhi, lots of people have written about, right?
[Guest]: And what Ram has done is dived into the archives, focused on primary material, but I just wish
[Guest]: he could have also, you know, told us what others have written about, about Gandhi.
[Guest]: Because look, there's a long tradition of that.
[Guest]: That's also one reason why academic historians are hurt.
[Guest]: Because they're like, look, this guy's writing on stuff that we have written about too.
[Guest]: And of course, he has original material, original research, they're fantastic.
[Guest]: But why doesn't he acknowledge us?
[Guest]: And I think that, you know, that is a legitimate criticism.
[Guest]: Look, I'm a big Ram Goha fan.
[Guest]: But I would say that, you know, if he, you know, he should inform the reader a little
[Guest]: more on others who have written about the similar subject.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I agree.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also a big Ram Goha fan.
[Amit Varma]: I got attacked on Twitter recently, because I defended him against someone who called
[Amit Varma]: him a sanghi uncle, quote, unquote, a sanghi uncle, Ram Goha of all people.
[Amit Varma]: And then Ram saw the Twitter fracas, and he wrote to me, and he said that, no, no, listen,
[Amit Varma]: don't defend me, just stay out of this.
[Amit Varma]: So it can get a little ugly.
[Amit Varma]: But just sort of speaking about those secondary sources, and just a question that occurs to
[Amit Varma]: me that at one level, of course, that you don't just want to go to the primary sources
[Amit Varma]: and see Gandhi's letters and Gandhi's writings and what others wrote on him at the time,
[Amit Varma]: but also how other historians have interpreted that and looked at that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, there's a term George Soros coined in his book, The Alchemy of Finance
[Amit Varma]: called reflexivity.
[Amit Varma]: And his point was that the way people think of the world changes the world.
[Amit Varma]: So if you think the reality is x and reality is actually y, reality will actually start
[Amit Varma]: moving from y to x if enough people think that is the case.
[Amit Varma]: Does this have an effect on historical figures whose careers play out over a long period
[Amit Varma]: of time, that they pay attention to what others are writing about them, or that what others
[Amit Varma]: are writing about them can shape a public mood and then change the way they behave?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, for that reason, also, you need to take account of this?
[Guest]: That's a good question, actually, look, my first book, Naseem Anand is dead, so he's
[Guest]: not going to listen to me, right?
[Amit Varma]: My book.
[Amit Varma]: But during his lifetime, because if you're looking at secondary sources, you might also
[Guest]: be looking at what a newspaper said about him in 1967, which can change the way he reacts.
[Guest]: Look, it's a good question, right?
[Guest]: I'm not going to give you a flippant reply, which is that, you know, do writers about
[Guest]: history help shape history through this causal pathway, namely that leaders and people of
[Guest]: influence are being influenced by that history?
[Guest]: It's a good question, you know, but just one pushback a little bit.
[Guest]: I don't, I'm not a historian.
[Guest]: So I call myself a political scientist, my PhD is in political science.
[Guest]: I'm an associate professor of political science at Ashoka, where I have some similarity with
[Guest]: historians is that I use archives, but I use interviews, historians don't use interviews,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So I use a ton.
[Guest]: So that's what I have in similarity with reporters.
[Guest]: So to me, the two primary sources that I use our newspaper archives, documents, you know,
[Guest]: private papers, etc. and as well as interviews, and frankly, the interviews are what I love
[Guest]: the best, right?
[Guest]: But the big difference I have with historians is that I'm interested in causation.
[Guest]: Historians don't like to think of, you know, the world in that way.
[Guest]: So for example, when it comes to the rise of the BJP, I'm interested in what helped
[Guest]: the BJP rise, right?
[Guest]: When it comes to Nassim Maraou, I'm interested in making the causal argument that Nassim
[Guest]: Maraou caused liberalization, right, or certainly caused the success of liberalization.
[Guest]: So I'm making a causal claim.
[Guest]: And thirdly, unlike historians, most of the secondary sources I refer to tend to be political
[Guest]: scientists, right?
[Guest]: So certainly, so I would call myself a political scientist who uses historical methods, as
[Guest]: well as journalistic methods, right?
[Guest]: But again, maybe it's the Harvard Law School syndrome, Amit, I don't feel insecure as having
[Guest]: to prove that I'm one amongst them.
[Guest]: I mean, whatever, man, I'm like a tenured professor in a university, right?
[Guest]: I teach students, you know, I just spent a semester teaching at Princeton.
[Guest]: So you know, I don't have that insecurity at that level.
[Guest]: And B, and at a deeper level, Amit, having spent lots of time with academics, I don't
[Guest]: think academics are any smarter than non-academics, right?
[Guest]: Just like it's like saying, are doctors smarter than non-doctors?
[Guest]: No, it's just that doctors have gone through a certain training, and know some methods
[Guest]: that non-doctors don't know, but their IQ may not be better than the patient, right?
[Guest]: And so similarly, I have, I'm under no illusion that academics are, you know, the smartest
[Guest]: people in the room.
[Guest]: No, they're not.
[Guest]: They just have done a PhD, most of them, and they have, you know, some kind of methodological
[Guest]: training that gives them certain advantages and doesn't give them many other advantages.
[Guest]: So this idea of having to write for academics, I don't think that they're the smartest people
[Guest]: in the room.
[Guest]: I mean, I'm not disrespecting academics.
[Guest]: But I think that they're just, you know, as smart as bankers or as smart as journalists
[Guest]: on average.
[Guest]: There's no particular difference, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Sturgeon's law would apply here as well, which is, you know, 95% of everything
[Amit Varma]: is crud.
[Amit Varma]: And everything is what?
[Unknown]: Crud is the term he uses, it's a synonym of crap.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, like one difference we'll often make is that we listen to some music today
[Amit Varma]: and then we'll say, it was so good in the 60s, Beatles were there, Rolling Stones was
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a selection bias.
[Amit Varma]: You're looking at the survivors.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the survivorship bias coming into play.
[Amit Varma]: Like 95% of music was crap then and it's crap now and if you have to compare the outliers
[Unknown]: to the outliers, this can often give a romantic tinge to the way that you sort of look at
[Amit Varma]: the past.
[Amit Varma]: But staying with academics for a while, like, in another context, the context of economics,
[Amit Varma]: Ajay Shah had once, you know, lamented on the show, that so many talented economists
[Amit Varma]: prefer to play that whole academic game, the circle jerk, as it were, and circle jerk is
[Amit Varma]: a word I'm using, Ajay is too polite to use such terms, but that whole academic circle
[Amit Varma]: jerk where they're writing for fellow academics and they're getting plaudits there and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It's a reflexive game and they're not really growing.
[Amit Varma]: And the incentives of that seem terrible to me because, you know, then you're sort of
[Amit Varma]: driven into directions to follow certain kinds of fashionable dogmas of the moment and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And Ajay's deeper point, which I think would resonate with you as well, given your book
[Amit Varma]: and Narsimha Rao, is that there are very few of these economists, therefore, who are choosing
[Amit Varma]: to stay back and engage with the real world.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the points and one of the themes he speaks about to give context to this is
[Amit Varma]: how there was actually a community of economists in the government at one point in time, economists
[Amit Varma]: and wonks and bureaucrats who believed in reform, who right from the 80s were doing
[Amit Varma]: the groundwork for reform so that when that moment came, you know, even before Narsimha
[Amit Varma]: Rao asked Manmohan Singh to be finance minister, Naresh Chandra, his cabinet secretary, had
[Amit Varma]: given him a paper outlining all the reforms that should happen because that community
[Amit Varma]: of wonks and bureaucrats had prepared it.
[Amit Varma]: And he says that that's dying out there, that it was vibrant through the 90s, it was vibrant
[Amit Varma]: in Vajpayee's time.
[Amit Varma]: He doesn't see that anymore in the younger generation who are playing the academic circle
[Amit Varma]: jerk game.
[Guest]: No, I think there are two reasons for that, there are two reasons for that.
[Guest]: The first reason is that, you know, the government is less receptive, right, let's be honest.
[Guest]: In the 1980s, you had people like LK Jha, Abid Hussain, Manmohan Singh, Montek Singh
[Guest]: Aluwalia, you know, Rakesh Mohan, you know, these are all fine intellects, right?
[Guest]: Rakesh Mohan did his PhD in Princeton, Manmohan Singh, you know, you know, was at Oxford and
[Guest]: Cambridge, Montek Singh Aluwalia, you know, was in the World Bank and you know, people
[Guest]: like LK Jha, Abid Hussain were first rate intellects, right?
[Guest]: And they were not just persuaded about the importance of liberalization, they knew how
[Guest]: to work the system and these two are not the same thing, right?
[Guest]: So that as you mentioned, when you had a determined Prime Minister or a talented Prime Minister
[Guest]: like Narsimha Rao, you have a note available to him saying do X, right?
[Guest]: And hire Y, which is hire Manmohan Singh, right?
[Guest]: I worry that this government and now I'm straying away from my research into, you know, speculations
[Guest]: on the present.
[Guest]: I worry that this government under Narendra Modi has contempt for, you know, economists
[Guest]: as intellectuals and that's a problem, right?
[Guest]: Because in a country like India, a developing country, we don't have left-wing intellectuals,
[Guest]: right-wing intellectuals, left-wing economists of high quality.
[Guest]: We have what we have and we have to use those few resources for national development.
[Guest]: You can't just say that everyone with a foreign degree and, you know, who speaks English should
[Guest]: be junked.
[Guest]: The RSS is not producing world-quality economists.
[Guest]: So you should go to war with the army you have.
[Guest]: And so I think that one reason for what you mentioned is that this government is less
[Guest]: receptive.
[Guest]: They're less receptive for people of the quality of Arvind Subramaniam, they're less receptive
[Guest]: of people like Raghuram Rajan and that's a problem, right?
[Guest]: But the second thing you said, which is that part of the reason is that academia itself
[Guest]: is being so professionalized that you're not finding, A, people who work on real issues
[Guest]: and B, people who are willing to engage with policy and government.
[Guest]: I think, unfortunately, that's true too.
[Guest]: I can't speak so much on economics only through friends who are, you know, who are economists.
[Guest]: It's certainly true of political science, right?
[Guest]: It's certainly true of the humanities.
[Guest]: I can see that.
[Guest]: And it is a larger tragedy.
[Guest]: There's a third thing, and I think I should have mentioned this earlier when I was talking
[Guest]: about my life history, which is that when I finished my PhD in Princeton, I was determined
[Guest]: to come back to India.
[Guest]: No matter what, I didn't want to look for a job in the US.
[Guest]: And part of that was, Amit, it was a deep-seated feeling that the creation of knowledge has
[Guest]: jurisdictional issues, right?
[Guest]: Or to put it differently, if you're an economist whose aim is to get tenure in a US university,
[Guest]: you won't focus, or it's much harder for you to focus on issues of economics in India.
[Guest]: It's just much harder for you to look at, you know, what is happening in American economics.
[Guest]: You'll try to find the analogy in India, right?
[Guest]: For example, in political science, so many of my friends in the US are obsessed with,
[Guest]: you know, Trump is the fascist, you know, Modi is India's Trump, right?
[Guest]: Which is absolute rubbish.
[Guest]: I think that's a third problem, which is we are seeing a brain drain of high quality scholars
[Guest]: to the West.
[Guest]: And the incentives to produce in the West are very different from the incentives to
[Guest]: produce in India.
[Guest]: And then I would say the main reason I came back to India was that I felt I would be stifled
[Guest]: in the US.
[Guest]: I would have to produce things that help me get tenure there.
[Guest]: Even if it meant lying about India or exaggerating about India, or more likely focusing on topics
[Guest]: that are not hot in India, right?
[Guest]: And that's not something I wanted to do.
[Guest]: And I think that's a third problem that, you know, explains what you're just saying, which
[Guest]: is that we're seeing a brain drain.
[Guest]: Now we have institutions like Ashoka, Kriya, and, you know, hopefully, state and central
[Guest]: universities also revive some of them like IISc are excellent, right?
[Guest]: We need to push that.
[Guest]: And you know, when I met senior BJP leaders for this book, for the BJP book, my second
[Guest]: book, they were constantly complaining saying, it's an anti-national institution.
[Guest]: I'm like, do you want the anti-nationals to be in India or do you want them to be abroad?
[Guest]: You know, don't you want them to be in India, because at least they're focusing on Indian
[Guest]: issues, right?
[Guest]: Don't you want to create, when you say make in India, don't you want institutions of higher
[Guest]: learning also to be made in India?
[Guest]: I think that matters hugely, you know, and you know, in an interview elsewhere, I've
[Guest]: said that self knowledge is a sovereign asset.
[Guest]: And I would say I believe that very strongly, right?
[Guest]: I mean, Amit, if you are doing this podcast, you know, sitting in the US or the UK, right
[Guest]: about India, but with half an American audience or half a UK audience, the questions you would
[Guest]: ask me or the questions you would ask others, the kind of people you would pick would be
[Amit Varma]: vastly different, wouldn't it?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, this, what you said about, you know, your argument to these BJP leaders about
[Amit Varma]: wouldn't you rather have your anti-national people within the country reminds me of this
[Amit Varma]: famous quote, I think it's by Lyndon Johnson, where he got someone in his government, and
[Amit Varma]: they asked him that, you know, why have you got this person in your government, he's your
[Amit Varma]: enemy.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, quote, it's probably better to have him inside the tent pissing out than
[Unknown]: outside the tent pissing in.
[Amit Varma]: And here it seems that how the BJP leaders would look at people in Ashoka would be that
[Amit Varma]: they're inside the tent pissing in.
[Amit Varma]: That's how I think they look at it.
[Amit Varma]: A quick anecdote before I go to my follow up question, you sort of mentioned, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people in the US who might think that, you know, talk about Trump and Modi and this and
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: I was once told by Steve Bannon, that Modi is India's Reagan.
[Amit Varma]: This really happened.
[Guest]: So I'd won this prize called the Bastia Prize.
[Guest]: Yeah, twice.
[Guest]: You're the only person to win it twice.
[Amit Varma]: No, Tim Harford won it a second time after my second time.
[Amit Varma]: So I was the first person to win it twice.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: But so the second time when I went, I there was a ceremony, I gave a speech.
[Amit Varma]: And the next day, the organizer of the ceremony called me and said there is a particular lady,
[Amit Varma]: I won't take her name, but a very influential person in Republican Party circles and the
[Amit Varma]: daughter of a very influential tech magnate.
[Amit Varma]: And he said that she wants to speak to you.
[Amit Varma]: She really loved your speech.
[Amit Varma]: So I said, Okay, I mean, why not?
[Amit Varma]: I'm open to meeting people.
[Amit Varma]: And then I googled her and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I found that there are a bunch of people who are supporting Ted Cruz at the time.
[Amit Varma]: This was 2015.
[Amit Varma]: The primaries had just kind of kicked off.
[Amit Varma]: So the next day I go and into this fancy building and there is this lady and with her there
[Amit Varma]: is Steve Bannon, who I hadn't heard of before, right?
[Amit Varma]: I had no idea what the alt-right is or any of that.
[Amit Varma]: So they introduced themselves.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, I do a magazine called Breitbart.
[Amit Varma]: And we heard your speech and your speech was great.
[Amit Varma]: And would you like to start India's version of Breitbart?
[Amit Varma]: And I that's kind of how I reacted.
[Amit Varma]: I kind of laughed because I didn't know the term alt-right then.
[Amit Varma]: This is 2015.
[Amit Varma]: But I knew that they were broadly conservative.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I'm not conservative.
[Guest]: You know, I would not agree with most of the views.
[Guest]: I wouldn't even call Breitbart conservative.
[Amit Varma]: I would just say they're right wing.
[Amit Varma]: No, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: They're nativist, protectionist.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they're beyond the pale.
[Amit Varma]: But at that time, I hadn't read Breitbart.
[Amit Varma]: In my mind, it's something vaguely conservative and why are they talking to me, you know?
[Amit Varma]: At most, if you have to put a label, you could say I'm libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: So I said, No, no, I don't think it's a fit.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, I believe in immigration, you guys are against that.
[Amit Varma]: And I believe in gay rights, and you guys have issues with that, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And but and then we just chatted quietly.
[Amit Varma]: And they were very nice.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, Steve Bannon looks at me and he said, Don't you think Modi is just
[Amit Varma]: like Reagan?
[Amit Varma]: And again, that's exactly how I reacted.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of said, Are you like kidding me?
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you know, Reagan.
[Amit Varma]: So clearly, you don't know Modi.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's absolutely the opposite, if anything, but interesting anecdote aside,
[Amit Varma]: and I wrote a post on that encounter, which I will link from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: My follow up question is somebody you should do seen on the unseen with Steve Bannon.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I don't think I would.
[Guest]: I mean, why not?
[Amit Varma]: Because you know what, because and we were discussing this before the thing, that my
[Amit Varma]: show works best when people come here without a filter when they speak honestly from the
[Amit Varma]: heart.
[Amit Varma]: And the problem with people in politics is that there'll be an agenda, there'll be a
[Amit Varma]: narrative, there'll be a particular way they want to present themselves, which is also
[Amit Varma]: why I don't have, I don't even invite politicians on this show, except you know, someone like
[Guest]: Shashi Tharoor.
[Guest]: No, I see your point.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you know, the whole logic of a four hour podcast is, you know, is premised on honesty.
[Amit Varma]: Honesty and trust, yeah, that you know, you can have that mutually respectful conversation
[Amit Varma]: and polite to each other.
[Amit Varma]: And it isn't someone trying to peddle a narrative, which won't work.
[Amit Varma]: But so to get back to my follow up question, the reason I mentioned academia, and both
[Amit Varma]: of us went off on, you know, talking about that is, tell me a little bit about history,
[Amit Varma]: the way history is studied and pursued in academia, because someone who is not related
[Amit Varma]: to academics or to history, their impression of history would be that history is an inquiry
[Amit Varma]: into what happened in the past.
[Amit Varma]: And it is a presentation of the results of that, that there are facts about the past,
[Amit Varma]: you turn it into a story, you present it, and that's history.
[Amit Varma]: That's how normal people think of history.
[Amit Varma]: But within academia, that's not it.
[Amit Varma]: That's not the thing alone.
[Amit Varma]: Within academia, and academic history, there are prisms that you have to look through ideologies
[Amit Varma]: that you have to superimpose on history, you have to look at it in a particular way, anything
[Amit Varma]: that falls outside that prism, and is not useful to you, you have to cast it aside.
[Amit Varma]: And that pollutes the field.
[Amit Varma]: And that perhaps is one more reason why a lot of good history actually comes from people
[Amit Varma]: outside, you know, that academic line, like people like Niram Guha, and Manu Pillay, and
[Amit Varma]: so many great Western historians as well, in fact, who are castigated for being popular
[Amit Varma]: historians.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this, because, you know, many of my listeners would have
[Amit Varma]: heard phrases like Marxist historian, and so on and so forth, kind of give me a sense
[Amit Varma]: of what are the different schools of history?
[Amit Varma]: What are the approaches to history?
[Amit Varma]: And when a newcomer like you comes in, how do you make sense of all this and set that
[Amit Varma]: path for yourself?
[Guest]: Well, you know, first up, I don't think I'm qualified to answer that question, because
[Guest]: I'm a political scientist, right?
[Guest]: So history is a distinct field.
[Guest]: I'm not a historian, I don't teach courses in history.
[Guest]: I have some amateur interest in history, especially ancient India.
[Guest]: So I'm reading up quite a bit about it.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, shout out to those who haven't read Upindar Singh's work, I just finished
[Guest]: reading her ancient India culture of contradictions, I could not recommend it more.
[Guest]: It has an ideological point of view.
[Guest]: It's also very, very, very good, right?
[Guest]: And it tells you that, you know, that the two things may go hand in hand that, you know,
[Guest]: a historian has a perspective, but within the perspective, you can be good or bad, right?
[Guest]: Or to give you the example of Rumila Thapar, who I broadly disagree with, not even broadly,
[Guest]: I specifically disagree with, right?
[Guest]: She's a Marxist historian, or I would say her guru, Didi Kosambi, who I would say is
[Guest]: even more of a Marxist historian, absolutely brilliant man, both of them are very good.
[Guest]: While I can't answer the question of different ways of thinking of history, because I'm not
[Guest]: a trained historian, you know, I use historical sources.
[Guest]: But I am a political scientist, I'm interested in power and politics.
[Guest]: I would only push your listeners that don't reject someone because of ideology.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, the, you know, to call Rumila Thapar a Marxist historian and should not
[Guest]: be a conversation ender.
[Guest]: It should be a spur for you to pick up her books, read it.
[Guest]: And if you disagree with it, you disagree with it.
[Guest]: So to give you just one example, she's written an absolutely brilliant book on Somnath, right?
[Guest]: The many voices of Somnath, the many stories of Somnath, where her argument is that the
[Guest]: destruction of Somnath in I think the 11th century by Mohammed of Ghazni, she doesn't
[Guest]: dispute that it happened, right?
[Guest]: But what she disputes it is that this narrative that it's a historical wound in Hindu civilization,
[Guest]: she says was not the case until the 19th century when the British made it the case, right?
[Guest]: And Hindus did not see it in quite this way.
[Guest]: And most of the sources we have, which talk about the barbarity of Mohammed of Ghazni
[Guest]: in destroying Somnath are Muslim sources and Persian sources, right, who had an incentive
[Guest]: to exaggerate, to make Mohammed of Ghazni seem like the protector of the faith rather
[Guest]: than somebody who wanted to make money and came to India to loot, right?
[Guest]: Now I happen to disagree with the book, right?
[Guest]: Because she's going somewhere with the argument, isn't just an argument and I disagree with
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But it's a very, very good book, right?
[Guest]: And it's, you know, something that you mentioned earlier, whether you agree or disagree, let's
[Guest]: see whether we can pick the best person who argues on either side.
[Guest]: And certainly Romila is one of them, right?
[Guest]: A critique of Romila Thapar, if people are interested, there's this writer in Swarajya
[Guest]: magazine, which is a center-right magazine called Arvindan Neelkantan, who I quite admire,
[Guest]: who's written like a detailed critique of various things Romila Thapar has done.
[Guest]: And what I liked about him and I told him that is, you know, I think he comes from an
[Guest]: RSS tradition and I told him that, look, you treat her with respect, right?
[Guest]: You disagree with her and in the few sentences where he's a bit disrespectful, I told him,
[Guest]: please don't write that, you know, because the power of an argument is that, you know,
[Guest]: Romila Thapar is excellent, right?
[Guest]: She's serious.
[Guest]: I have no need to question her bona fides, right?
[Guest]: But these are the ways in which her interpretation has made errors, right?
[Guest]: And so for those who are non-academics, who are attacking historians, this is what I would,
[Guest]: I'm not, I mean, I agree with many of the criticisms, as I said, I'm not in agreement
[Guest]: with Romila Thapar's project at all, right?
[Guest]: But she's very, very good, right?
[Guest]: And to attack her, you have to treat her respectfully and be as good, right?
[Guest]: There's this American show called The Wire.
[Guest]: Some of your listeners may have heard about it.
[Guest]: And there's this man there called Omar and Omar's famous line is that if you, you know,
[Guest]: if you're trying to shoot the king, you better not miss, right?
[Guest]: So if you're trying to go after someone like Romila Thapar or Didi Kosambi, these are great
[Guest]: scholars, right?
[Guest]: So make the effort to kind of rise to the occasion.
[Amit Varma]: Does that make sense?
[Amit Varma]: No, that makes a lot of sense to me.
[Amit Varma]: And The Wire, of course, is, you know, one of the great TV series of all time.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, The Wire and Decalogue are, for me, the gold standard.
[Guest]: You really...
[Guest]: Which is the other one?
[Guest]: Decalogue.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I haven't seen it.
[Amit Varma]: Which is pre-OTT times.
[Amit Varma]: It was made in 1989 or 1990.
[Unknown]: It's a series of 10 short films for Polish television by the director Krzysztof Kielowski.
[Amit Varma]: And each episode is loosely inspired by one of the Ten Commandments, even though I don't
[Guest]: think they were believers.
[Guest]: I should write this down after the show.
[Amit Varma]: I want to see this.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, it's a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: It is, for me, the pinnacle of cinema.
[Amit Varma]: And I've spoken about it on the show before.
[Amit Varma]: And I kind of go on and on about it.
[Amit Varma]: So I won't kind of repeat that bit.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to get a little specific here.
[Amit Varma]: Like when you say you disagree with Romila Thapar's project, what is the specific disagreement?
[Amit Varma]: For example, with that book, what would have been your specific disagreement?
[Amit Varma]: And also, and these two might even have the same answer, that because the term goes around
[Amit Varma]: a lot, Marxist historian, what does it really mean?
[Amit Varma]: What is the lens you're looking at?
[Amit Varma]: And I accept that you're not a historian, and you've clarified that you're a political
[Amit Varma]: scientist.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, as someone who's read much more of this stuff than I have, certainly
[Amit Varma]: enough to have disagreements with Romila Thapar, I've read her a little bit, but I don't know
[Amit Varma]: enough to have disagreements.
[Amit Varma]: So but just expand a little bit on that.
[Guest]: So I'm not a, you know, neither am I a Marxist or a scholar of Marx, nor am I a historian.
[Guest]: But loosely put, I would say, you know, Irfan Habib, Romila Thapar, Didi Kosambi, Didi Kosambi
[Guest]: is really the great scholar, you know.
[Guest]: So if anyone, you know, as I said, you know, if you want to aim for the king, you best
[Guest]: not miss, first aim for Didi Kosambi, you know.
[Guest]: And you know, for those of you who don't want to read his work, there's an excellent talk
[Guest]: that Pratap Bhanu Mehta, the political theorist, Pratap Bhanu Mehta gave on Didi Kosambi in
[Guest]: a Didi Kosambi lecture, a named lecture on him on YouTube, right, which sort of, you
[Guest]: know, lays out Didi Kosambi's view of history.
[Guest]: And it gives you a good sense of what the Marxist lens as applied in India is, which
[Guest]: is a different, slightly different from the European and American Marxists, right.
[Guest]: So the Indian Marxists, you know, are a little different breed.
[Guest]: One thing they all have in common is the emphasis on class, right, and material dialecticism
[Guest]: as applied to class and class analysis, and a belief that the real struggle or the story
[Guest]: of history is class struggle, everything else is an epiphenomena, right.
[Guest]: So to take that to the specifics of Romila Thapa's book on Somnath, her argument is that
[Guest]: the motivation of Mohammed of Ghazni was not religious, right, and the insult and the humiliation
[Guest]: that the Hindus felt was not religious, right.
[Guest]: And it was invented much later on by the British, right, who had their own kind of agenda.
[Guest]: So that would be one very strong emphasis that other axes of motivation are considered
[Guest]: to use Marxist phrases epiphenomena, right.
[Guest]: The other, so I would say that is a very important element, that there are peasant struggles,
[Guest]: that you are looking at different modes of production, and during these different modes
[Guest]: of production, feudalism, capitalism, what is the underlying class struggle that is going
[Guest]: on and that forms the basis of history, right.
[Guest]: So for example, a lot of Marxist historians would see the failure of the national movement
[Guest]: as not looking at class revolution and focusing on nationalism instead, right, and scholars
[Guest]: like Bipin Chandra, Aditya Mukherjee, Mridula Mukherjee, who are again historians, but they
[Guest]: are kind of, they are off the left, but they are Congress historians who are critiquing
[Guest]: Marxism or Marxist historians by saying that actually the national movement was a class
[Guest]: revolution, right.
[Guest]: So that is sort of, you know, defeating the Marxist on their own terrain, right.
[Guest]: So I would say that, you know, broadly put, that becomes the way of analysis.
[Guest]: It is not the only school of Indian scholarship.
[Guest]: So for example, two other scholars that I admire greatly on ancient India also happen
[Guest]: to be my colleagues in Ashoka University, that is Upinder Singh, who we have mentioned
[Guest]: and Nayanjot Lahiri, who has written really a classic on Ashoka.
[Guest]: Another scholar who is not a Marxist, but who understood Marxist ways of writing is
[Guest]: Airavadan Mahadevan, who was a former IAS officer who dedicated his life to decode the
[Guest]: Indus Valley script.
[Guest]: Again he was not a Marxist.
[Guest]: So, by no means is the Indian tradition on studying ancient India, and this is my, you
[Guest]: know, this is all I am focusing on, is a Marxist tradition, right, but you know, you have high
[Guest]: quality scholars that come out of India who also happen to be Marxist, but not all of
[Guest]: them are.
[Amit Varma]: And when you set about writing first the book on Narsimha Rao and then the book on the BJP,
[Amit Varma]: what was sort of your models for this?
[Amit Varma]: Like what are you looking back at?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you say that you were writing about history, but it wasn't history per se, quote
[Amit Varma]: unquote, and, you know, it was more using historical facts to talk about political science.
[Guest]: I'm just answering, you know, so I'm saying I'm not a historian in a disciplinary sense.
[Guest]: So most of your listeners who are not academics or not in a university would say that what
[Amit Varma]: is Vinay talking about?
[Amit Varma]: He is a historian, right?
[Guest]: He's rewriting history.
[Guest]: Yeah, he's writing history.
[Guest]: He's writing, you know, he's writing about the past, like Narsimha Rao existed in the
[Guest]: past.
[Guest]: He's writing about the past, right?
[Guest]: But the reason I'm pushing back is that over time, the discipline of history across the
[Guest]: world and the discipline of political science have moved in that history is considered firmly
[Guest]: in the humanities, along with anthropology, comparative literature, English, etc.
[Guest]: And political science has moved closer to social science, like economics, social science.
[Guest]: One is, of course, the use of data and numbers, right?
[Guest]: But that's not the only thing.
[Guest]: I mean, I would say in political science, the big difference is that our focus is on
[Guest]: causality, causal mechanisms, causal influence.
[Guest]: Why did something happen?
[Guest]: Historians will say, look, you can't put a finger on it.
[Guest]: There are multiple reasons for why it happened, right?
[Guest]: Whereas I am interested, that's very much my training, you know, and as I said, historians,
[Guest]: the main method they use is archives, right?
[Guest]: They don't use survey data, for example, historians don't do that.
[Guest]: They don't do interviews.
[Guest]: No, I don't do survey data.
[Guest]: But I do a ton of interviews, which is some, you know, or what we now fashionably call
[Guest]: oral history.
[Guest]: But that's what journalists have been doing for a very long time, right?
[Guest]: So it's just, I mean, again, if you're, I'm answering this, presuming that at least 1%
[Guest]: of your listenership are academics to make that distinction.
[Guest]: But if you're not an academic, it's not a substantive difference.
[Guest]: It's basically a disciplinary difference, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So when you talk about methodology, you know, and a lot of it is based on interviews.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it seems to me that it must be especially tricky to write books like what you've done.
[Amit Varma]: I was about to say history, but I'll just say to write the two sort of biographies that
[Amit Varma]: you've done, at least in the Narasimha Rao book to a certain extent, it's not exactly
[Amit Varma]: a biography biography, but it encompasses elements of that, that one when you're writing
[Amit Varma]: about events from a historical perspective, but that still that, you know, many of the
[Amit Varma]: characters are alive, and kicking and interested in how the world will view them or how the
[Amit Varma]: world will view events and all of that, there then comes a trap of how much do you rely
[Amit Varma]: on interviews?
[Amit Varma]: And how much do you rely on oral history from people who were participants and who will
[Amit Varma]: want to push one side of the story?
[Amit Varma]: Now, what you've done scrupulously in both books, is that wherever there are multiple
[Amit Varma]: versions of something, you've pointed out what those multiple versions sort of are,
[Amit Varma]: you know, but you know, how careful do you then have to be like, when you're covering
[Amit Varma]: a particular event, do you then tell yourself that if this is likely to be something that
[Amit Varma]: is contentious, I should get a larger sample size of people to speak to from different
[Amit Varma]: points of view?
[Amit Varma]: How do you how do you handle that?
[Guest]: Academics wrestle with this question a lot.
[Guest]: This is that when it comes to interviews, this is the all the problems that you listed.
[Guest]: But reporters do it on an everyday basis, and they have found a solution, right?
[Guest]: You have good reporters, you have bad reporters, any story you do, right, any story you do,
[Guest]: a reporter will speak to various interested participants by definition, because the interested
[Guest]: participants are also the sources, right?
[Guest]: And then the question is the question you just asked, which is how do you balance the
[Guest]: fact that the source has an interest in the story and is spinning something to do, right?
[Guest]: And this is what the skill of a reporter is, which is you get the source to speak, but
[Guest]: you're very, very cognizant that the reporter comes from, the source comes from a certain
[Guest]: position.
[Guest]: So one way to do it is to try to balance it, search for the other side, so that at least
[Guest]: you have multiple voices there, right?
[Guest]: Two is do a preliminary fact check for the source, is the source, you know, lying, you
[Guest]: know, is the source reliable?
[Guest]: Ultimately, look, this comes down to human judgment, right?
[Guest]: Why is Bob Woodward, Bob, Bob Woodward, right?
[Guest]: Same issues, all the people he interviews, having, you know, when he interviews Trump,
[Guest]: Trump has an interest in Trump, right?
[Guest]: Now, how do you, you know, so how do you balance it out?
[Guest]: And so I found myself Amit, in answering this question, not relying on academia, I think
[Guest]: for historical sources, like archives, and for secondary sources, and for research design,
[Guest]: academia was excellent.
[Guest]: My PhD training helped me, it didn't help me for interviews, I had to go back to my
[Guest]: Indian Express days.
[Guest]: I was actually a not a great reporter, I was an edit, you know, an editor, copy editor
[Guest]: pretending to be a reporter, but I knew tons of high quality reporters, how do you do that?
[Guest]: How do you answer the questions that you just asked me, right?
[Guest]: And I think this is what it is that if you if you find it's a contentious issue, get
[Guest]: multiple points of view, right, you know, but you shouldn't, you know, strive for balance
[Guest]: when there is none, you know, you shouldn't say, you know, some, you know, x believe that,
[Guest]: you know, the final solution happened, y believed it didn't happen.
[Guest]: That's ridiculous.
[Guest]: There are facts in the middle.
[Guest]: So do your own research, right?
[Guest]: And frankly, Amit, I found that doing my own research was hugely helpful when I interviewed
[Guest]: people, right?
[Guest]: So, for example, when I interviewed Manmohan Singh for the Narsimha Rao book, I had done
[Guest]: enough research, you know, I read some of the things he had written, some of his reviews
[Guest]: from the 70s, etc, etc, when I was asking him questions, and I could see that he was
[Guest]: impressed.
[Guest]: And that was important for me, because I was in my early 30s.
[Guest]: And here I was, you know, interviewing an ex Prime Minister about economics, right and
[Guest]: about liberalization, and I have to prepare, because that's when they take me seriously,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: But preparing also means that I can call out when somebody is saying something that is
[Guest]: factually untrue.
[Guest]: The third thing is what you said that when you have a very contentious issue, rely on
[Guest]: multiple people when you have like a, like, for example, suppose, you know, what Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh was wearing at a particular point of time or Narsimha Rao was wearing, or what
[Guest]: was Narsimha Rao's health, I'm happy only relying on his doctor because it's relatively
[Guest]: uncontentious.
[Guest]: Now, this requires human judgment, there's just no way to run away from that, right.
[Guest]: And at some level, I am asking the reader to trust me.
[Guest]: But what I'm trying to do while asking the reader to trust me is also to be as transparent
[Guest]: as I possibly can, in most cases, tell them the sources, right, give the page number if
[Guest]: I'm using a book or an article so that they can read it themselves, right.
[Guest]: And I realized, Amit, that, you know, all of this, which is the process by which you
[Guest]: get interviews, the process by which you look at documents, is all about building trust
[Guest]: with the reader, right.
[Guest]: And readers know that immediately, I'm sure you, you know, you have the same experience
[Guest]: with your podcast listeners, very quickly, they know whether you're lying to them or
[Guest]: not, whether you're selling them something or not, right.
[Guest]: And that changes who you are, you know, you're very careful in asking questions to your your
[Guest]: own interviewees, because you know that the podcast listener is trusting you, right.
[Guest]: And I was very conscious of that burden that you know, I was, you know, in some sense,
[Guest]: I felt I was an agent of the reader.
[Guest]: And you know, when I was interviewing Manmohan Singh or anybody or Nassim Rao's doctor or
[Guest]: his cook, I was there on behalf of the reader, right.
[Guest]: And as I said, a lot of this I learned from reporting rather than academia.
[Amit Varma]: So just thinking aloud, I think the one difference between what I do and what you do is that
[Amit Varma]: a podcast, essentially, a conversation like this is a work in progress, it's not finally
[Amit Varma]: edited, a lot of the stuff is just thinking aloud, and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So my listeners, because of the intimacy of the medium, they'll know that I'm acting in
[Amit Varma]: good faith, that I'm making the best honest effort I can, but am I always right?
[Amit Varma]: Or will I always say something today that, you know, that I will agree with tomorrow
[Amit Varma]: also?
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I've changed my mind on the show.
[Unknown]: But you have to come up with a finished product.
[Guest]: That's what they say.
[Amit Varma]: But yes, maybe more finished, because I have the luxury of doing many edits, right?
[Guest]: You can't rewrite, right?
[Guest]: You can edit, but you can't rewrite.
[Guest]: But you know, the issue remains the same, which is, you know, I look back at the books
[Guest]: and I've made mistakes, you know, like each book has, you know, more than 1000, you know,
[Guest]: I would say, I mean, I'm just flipping maybe 2000 footnotes each roughly, right?
[Guest]: Some of them are erroneous, right?
[Guest]: I've, you know, in later editions, I've made an attempt to change sometimes somebody, you
[Guest]: know, something as simple as the spelling of a person, I've sometimes got it wrong,
[Guest]: I try to change it, right?
[Guest]: Readers are okay with that, right?
[Guest]: Saying that, look, on margin, you make a product like this, some errors are inevitable, as
[Guest]: long as you're honest, and you self correct, and the error is not massive.
[Guest]: It's okay, right?
[Guest]: It's like a relationship, yeah, no relationship is perfect.
[Guest]: You know, husband, wife are constantly fighting, both are imperfect.
[Guest]: The relationship with the reader and the writer also presumes that the writer is imperfect.
[Guest]: And by the way, I also presume the reader is imperfect, yeah, which is why I take so
[Guest]: much effort to make the bitter medicine in the book palatable to the reader by putting
[Guest]: some honey, because I know that, you know, the reader saying, what's happening on Facebook,
[Guest]: what's happening on WhatsApp, I have to constantly bring the reader from that to focus on the
[Guest]: book, right?
[Amit Varma]: So it's, it's a relationship like anything else.
[Amit Varma]: Elaborate on that with a concrete example, like what is a bitter medicine?
[Guest]: What is the honey?
[Guest]: So the bitter medicine is the facts of the book, right?
[Guest]: So to give you an example, in the Nassim Rao book, I have two chapters on Nassim Rao's
[Guest]: economics, right?
[Guest]: The economic liberalization reform now, other than Amit Verma and economists, everybody
[Guest]: else finds this instinctively boring.
[Guest]: What is fiscal deficit?
[Guest]: What is monetary deficit?
[Guest]: What is fiscal policy?
[Guest]: Monetary policy is something that is sleep inducing.
[Guest]: This is a fact.
[Guest]: I'm not blind to that, right?
[Guest]: I would have loved to be in a world in which readers love it with as much passion as I
[Guest]: do.
[Guest]: I know they don't, which is why I began that chapter with gold leaving South Bombay, right?
[Guest]: From the RBI headquarters and going to Sahara airport and being loaded, you know, and in
[Guest]: being doing that India is, you know, is selling is spawning its family silver.
[Guest]: Why do I do that visual, right?
[Guest]: I do that visual because that's the honey, right?
[Guest]: Which is entrapping the reader to read the rest of the book, right?
[Guest]: For the next chapter, which is the Nassim Rao's economics from 92 to 96, where he, you
[Guest]: know, where he plays the middle overs, not just as an opening batsman, I begin by talking
[Guest]: about Chanakya and Chanakya's various ways in which the king should deal with enemies,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Samadhana, Bheda Danda, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Why do I do that?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's to basically give the honey, right?
[Guest]: That entraps, you know, or that makes it palatable to read about, you know, jet airways opening
[Guest]: or this, you know, or, you know, licenses to banks, etc, etc, which I know that the
[Guest]: reader may not like.
[Guest]: And look, in doing so, it's like anything else, it's any other relationship, Amit, you've
[Guest]: had this conversation with me, right?
[Guest]: Now imagine a friend of yours who has no interest in your podcast, right?
[Guest]: I hope you have some like that, you know, and you want to explain this conversation
[Guest]: or this book on Nassim Rao to them.
[Guest]: You in your mind are, want to be honest to the book, but at the same time, you know that
[Guest]: your friend's attention is limited, and you want to pick out something juicy to tell the
[Guest]: friend to capture the friend's attention, so that they get the core argument what you're
[Guest]: trying to say, right?
[Guest]: It's no different, you know, for me, it's like a grandmother test, or my, you know,
[Guest]: I have a daughter, my daughter test, can you tell the story to capture their attention?
[Guest]: That doesn't mean you lie.
[Guest]: That doesn't mean you needlessly simplify, but it's incumbent on you to make it interesting
[Guest]: to somebody who you know, who for whom it's not otherwise interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's well said.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking, speaking of friends who don't listen to the podcast, that's almost all of
[Amit Varma]: them in the sense that for a long time, I did not know the kind of following this podcast
[Amit Varma]: have because none of my friends listen to podcasts at all, leave alone mine.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, it's only serendipitously that in the last couple of years, it kind of hit
[Amit Varma]: me that the show does mean a lot to many people, and some of them are now my friends.
[Guest]: So but I have, I have retained the friends who don't listen to podcasts.
[Guest]: And just think back, if you can just tell me, I know this is the other way.
[Guest]: But you know, think of a book you recently read, right?
[Guest]: And you know, to a friend who doesn't read books, you want to tell Wow, I really had
[Guest]: a good time.
[Amit Varma]: How do you do it?
[Amit Varma]: I told you about Wanting by Luke Burgess a little while back.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I even sort of ironically made you want to read the book because of, you know,
[Guest]: mimetically, which is what the book is about.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: But you know how you did it?
[Guest]: You did it by saying there's something called thick and thin description.
[Guest]: Look back into your life, namely my life, and what part is thick and thin.
[Guest]: And you know what the most interesting thing to anybody is that person.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you got to make it relatable.
[Guest]: You made it relatable.
[Guest]: You got to make it.
[Amit Varma]: That's the honey.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's the honey.
[Amit Varma]: And what you say about economics being boring for most people is sadly true, which is why
[Amit Varma]: you know, the most famous Hayek in the world, sadly, is Salma Hayek and not Frederick Hayek.
[Amit Varma]: So what are you going to do about that?
[Amit Varma]: No, but it's your job to change that.
[Amit Varma]: That's my job.
[Guest]: Or at least to move the needle a little bit towards, you know, the one Hayek over the
[Guest]: other Hayek, right?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I totally do that to the extent that there might be friends will, you know, see
[Amit Varma]: me coming and say, Oh, no, he's going to talk about Hayek again.
[Amit Varma]: But so here's the next question.
[Amit Varma]: I would imagine that when you start writing the book, you have a broad sense of a frame
[Amit Varma]: of what the book is, you know, the questions that you're asking, that's right.
[Amit Varma]: And you may not know the exact answers.
[Amit Varma]: And then you get into the book and then structure reveals itself and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And it begins to form.
[Amit Varma]: Now what happens here is that on the one extreme, you can have the approach that you just know
[Amit Varma]: the conclusion you want to reach.
[Amit Varma]: And once you've got enough facts to kind of make a case for that, you end the book, which
[Amit Varma]: is which you've completely avoided, obviously, and there's far more rigor and depth in that
[Amit Varma]: the other approach, which you're closer to, but which you also kind of avoided is that
[Amit Varma]: you just go endlessly into rabbit holes forever, like one of my favorite biographers is Robert
[Guest]: Caro, you must have read him.
[Amit Varma]: And even before the Lyndon Johnson, like in the mid 60s, the Masterpiece, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So in the mid 60s, he started writing a book called The Power Broker, which he thought
[Amit Varma]: he'd write in a year.
[Amit Varma]: It took him eight, nine years.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a masterpiece.
[Amit Varma]: It's I think it's a million words and was cut down to 900,000 and 100,000 pages, right?
[Guest]: Yeah, it's huge.
[Guest]: On Robert Moses.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, on Robert Moses.
[Amit Varma]: And it's not just a biography of Moses, as a person, therefore, you know, a biography,
[Amit Varma]: it's also a study of power and what power does to human beings, and therefore a work
[Amit Varma]: of political science.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also the biography of a city, the city of New York, and it works at so many
[Amit Varma]: different levels.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, he in the late 70s, he began this biography of Lyndon Johnson, which is
[Amit Varma]: supposed to be five volumes, four are out, he's in his 70s, at some point, hopefully
[Amit Varma]: the fifth will be out, but like 40 years have gone by 45 years have gone by.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, it took him longer to write the fourth volume than it took Lyndon Johnson
[Amit Varma]: to live, you know, the period that are being described there.
[Amit Varma]: So incredibly meticulous and just, you know, remarkable and thank God he exists.
[Amit Varma]: But everybody can't afford to be like that.
[Amit Varma]: So how do you like kind of find that balance that it must be so seductive, certainly it
[Amit Varma]: would be for me like so often when I read a book like yours, in fact, you know, I find
[Amit Varma]: myself going to the footnotes, and then I'll just enter rabbit holes.
[Amit Varma]: And that just goes on and on.
[Amit Varma]: When you're actually writing, you're doing the research, how do you get yourself to a
[Amit Varma]: point where you say that this is enough?
[Amit Varma]: I've got it, I move on to the next thing.
[Guest]: Very good question, right?
[Guest]: So to, by the way, somebody you must interview is Patrick French.
[Guest]: Have you?
[Guest]: I haven't yet.
[Guest]: So Patrick French has written the best biography I've read of anyone, which is a biography
[Guest]: of V.S.
[Guest]: Naipaul, called the world is what it is, I find it the best biography.
[Guest]: And it's astonishingly deeply critical of Naipaul yet an authorized biography, it's
[Guest]: unbelievable how he pulled it off.
[Guest]: And he gave me this advice, he said, look, some version of perfection is the enemy of
[Guest]: production, right?
[Guest]: So when should you stop research and start writing?
[Guest]: And he said, you know, you'll always have four books you should read, three people you
[Guest]: should interview, two archives you should go to before you start writing, right?
[Guest]: So don't, don't stop, don't wait, stop and write and leave things blank, right?
[Guest]: So I've learned that, which is that research and writing is not a linear process, it's
[Guest]: an iterative process.
[Guest]: So you do some research, and then you start writing and you leave blanks and then you
[Guest]: go for one other step of research, where your job is only to fill the blanks up, right?
[Guest]: Because otherwise, you're waiting for this mythic sense of completion, before you begin
[Guest]: to write.
[Guest]: And that's a mythic sense.
[Guest]: And frankly, I learned that while doing a PhD in the wrong way, I think I wasted an
[Guest]: entire year looking for something that was a delta 10%, right?
[Guest]: So the question is the following that you keep doing research, right, at some point,
[Guest]: you have to say that, look, if I spend another one year doing research, it's only going to
[Guest]: improve the book 5%.
[Guest]: That's when you should stop.
[Guest]: So when you're at 80% or 90% there, you should stop and start writing.
[Guest]: And then use the research phase post starting the writing to actually do a little more focused
[Guest]: research, right?
[Guest]: I don't know whether that that makes sense, because too many people I know, especially
[Guest]: those who do PhDs or writing books are like, you know, they're spending years and years
[Guest]: and years.
[Guest]: One more book I have to read, one more book I have to read, one more book I have to read.
[Guest]: It's wrong, you know, so you should stop when you're even 70% and you should start writing
[Guest]: and leave holes and then do a second round of research.
[Guest]: On the larger question that you asked on, you know, structure, how do I go about the
[Guest]: book?
[Guest]: I am quite a structured guy, right?
[Guest]: So for both the books, there was a historical fact element, Nassim Rao was born at a certain
[Guest]: time, died at a certain time.
[Guest]: So what I did was for both of them, I had done about a year of general soaking and poking,
[Guest]: not focused research.
[Guest]: Generally, should I do the book?
[Guest]: What should it be about?
[Guest]: Nassim Rao's book, of course, start to finish took a year, but I'm saying for the second
[Guest]: book, right?
[Guest]: Very early on in the process, I wrote a mock table of contents, right?
[Guest]: Saying that it will be a 350 page book, there'll be an introduction, there'll be a conclusion
[Guest]: and then the 30 page chapters and I think Ram told me that don't have chapters more
[Guest]: than 20 to 25 pages gets too boring, right?
[Guest]: So if you have a 250 page book, you know, you should have at least like 15 chapters,
[Guest]: you know, so keep small short chapters.
[Guest]: So very early on, I write a mock table of contents and in both books, I've realized
[Guest]: that at the end, when I look back at the original table of contents, it was actually 50% there,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So when I write a table of contents, right, then every book and archive I'm writing, I'm
[Guest]: putting into one of the chapters and I also divide the chapters into sub chapters.
[Guest]: So when I'm reading a book, secondary literature, which is meant for say my Nassim Rao book
[Guest]: or the BJP book, I'm instinctively saying, ah, this is a nice paragraph, you know what,
[Guest]: it should be in chapter 6, section 4.
[Guest]: So I write the CH 6, section 4 and then I go back and I and in my word document, I say
[Guest]: this is what you have to do, right?
[Guest]: And of course, once you read what your table of contents is changes a little bit.
[Guest]: So you know, one of my favorite phrases, it's a unfortunate phrases, you should be prepared
[Guest]: to kill your babies.
[Guest]: So if you have a great idea for a book early on, and you have a great theory for your book
[Guest]: early on, while doing research, you know, that theory may be wrong, you should be honest
[Guest]: enough to change your view.
[Guest]: So don't be wedded to an original idea, right?
[Guest]: You may have even spent a month doing research to realize actually, that's a total waste,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So be honest enough and make the changes.
[Guest]: So what happens is, then I tinker with the chapters, I change the headings, I increase
[Guest]: the size, I move it up and down, I do that, but as I said, even at the end, 60% is what
[Guest]: I began with, right?
[Guest]: But it really helps in focused research, because every time I'm doing research, I'm telling
[Guest]: myself, okay, I've talked to him, you know, let's say I'm talking to Nassim Rao's cook,
[Guest]: as he's speaking, I'm saying, oh, man, that was a nice sentence.
[Guest]: That is chapter six, section two, oh, man, that's a nice section.
[Guest]: That was chapter one, you know, and then I, you know, as he's speaking, I write down,
[Guest]: and then I immediately go and move it to that particular word document where it is, which
[Guest]: means that when I'm about to write, right, a 25 page chapter, I have 40 pages of notes
[Guest]: for those chapters broken up into sections, and each section says where that primary material
[Guest]: is, right?
[Guest]: So if that's, you know, everybody has their way of doing it, this is my way of doing it.
[Guest]: The big con of this way of doing it, which is a structured way, is that I might very
[Guest]: early get committed to an idea rather than inductively making your way through an idea,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And so the one way to solve that is not to be too wedded to the original table of contents,
[Guest]: but that's the con.
[Guest]: So the but the pro of what I'm doing is you can finish things quickly, and wastage is
[Guest]: less.
[Guest]: So to put it differently, and tell me when I'm getting boring on this, because I can
[Guest]: speak endlessly on this process, which is that when I was doing my PhD, I used to ask
[Guest]: around to other people doing PhD, how much of that actually made it to your dissertation?
[Guest]: Which is the same question asking that anybody writing a book, how much of the research you
[Guest]: did made it to the actual book, actual pages, right?
[Guest]: And I found that for PhD students, it was, you know, 30 to 40%.
[Guest]: Can you believe it?
[Guest]: 60% is wasted.
[Guest]: 60% is you're going down rabbit holes that don't make it to the book.
[Guest]: Now some of that is inevitable in a process where you're doing original work.
[Guest]: But my argument is, can you make it from 30 to 40% to 60 to 70%?
[Guest]: You've doubled your productivity, still, there will be 30% wastage.
[Guest]: And that's what it means to do original work, but it's not going to be 60% wastage.
[Guest]: Was that too detailed an answer?
[Amit Varma]: It's a fantastic answer.
[Guest]: I'm really passionate about this stuff.
[Guest]: And I want to spread the word, but you know, I'm deeply aware that it may be too bitter
[Guest]: a medicine without enough honey.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, it's a fantastic answer.
[Amit Varma]: And you correctly spoke about the pros and the cons.
[Amit Varma]: And for listeners who are enjoying this, let me tell you that we spoke for almost at least
[Amit Varma]: 45 minutes about the writing process itself in our earlier episode.
[Amit Varma]: So they should kind of go and listen to that.
[Amit Varma]: And Joan Didion once said, I don't know what I think until I write it down.
[Amit Varma]: So the process of writing as you know, part of a process of thinking about something of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, improving your own understanding of the material is something that I totally
[Amit Varma]: get and what like fiction writers will often talk of an approach to structuring a novel
[Amit Varma]: as you know, they'll talk of the architect and the gardener.
[Amit Varma]: So the architect is someone who's making a map where this is the house, this is the land
[Amit Varma]: it occupies, these are all the rooms, you do all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And the gardener is just pottering around messing around with stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And there isn't a right or wrong, different approaches work for different people, it kind
[Amit Varma]: of depends on who you are.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in a sense, what you're saying is that you're more of an architect.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, within each room, within each unit, you are still doing gardening, you're
[Amit Varma]: still leaving that space open.
[Guest]: I'd say that's right.
[Guest]: But I think that's okay, as long as you're aware of the flaws of being only an architect.
[Guest]: And if your approach is a gardening approach, all power to you, but be aware that there
[Guest]: are problems, because then you're gardening everywhere, without knowing where the house
[Amit Varma]: layout is here.
[Amit Varma]: So when you started in the Narsimha Rao book, were you aware of the answer that you eventually
[Guest]: arrived at?
[Guest]: No, no, I knew the structure of the book, I kept pushing to say, why should I care?
[Guest]: And you know, the answer I, and for even for the new books I'm thinking about, I'm always
[Guest]: asking this question, Amit, which is why should someone who doesn't care one ounce about politics,
[Guest]: who doesn't visit Bari Sons in Delhi, who doesn't listen to Seen and the Unseen, what
[Guest]: should they get from this book, right?
[Guest]: So is there something larger that Narsimha Rao's life could hold?
[Guest]: But I didn't find an answer until I was midway.
[Guest]: And the answer is one sentence was Narsimha Rao tells us, how do you bring about change
[Guest]: without power?
[Guest]: How do you first gather power and influence and then wield it because he didn't have a
[Guest]: mandate, right?
[Guest]: He had only constraints.
[Guest]: So under tremendous constraints without power, how do you then bring about change?
[Guest]: That's the central question, right?
[Guest]: And the central answer was he did it, because he knew how to be a lion, a fox and a mouse,
[Guest]: which we'll talk about.
[Guest]: But you know, I had so many people outside of politics, policy, the world of Amit Verma,
[Guest]: coming to me and telling me this book resonated with me, you know, startup founders would
[Guest]: come and say, you know, people think that startup founders have all the power.
[Guest]: I don't, I can't fire my design person, right?
[Guest]: I want to come into the room and I think it's a lousy website, but I can't, I have to suck
[Guest]: up to them.
[Guest]: I have to like, you know, because there's a shortage of labor, right?
[Guest]: I had, you know, a top bank, a country head of a top bank, MNC, telling me, you know what,
[Guest]: this book totally resonated with me, because people think I'm the CEO or the MD of the
[Guest]: of the India version of MNC.
[Guest]: But I have two people in London breathing down my neck.
[Guest]: And all my deputies in India are reporting to their lion counterparts in London, not
[Guest]: me.
[Guest]: So I have to first construct power, I don't have power given to me on a plate, I don't
[Guest]: have a mandate given to me on a plate, I have to first construct that power, and then use
[Guest]: it to bring about change in my bank, right?
[Guest]: Which is frankly the Nassim Rao story, which is you don't, you know, it's so easy to say
[Guest]: that if you have power and mandate, you should do ABCD to transform India.
[Guest]: First, how do you get that power?
[Guest]: How do you get that mandate?
[Guest]: How do you make sure that you're operating within the constraints?
[Guest]: Every person is dealt with a bunch of cards, right?
[Guest]: Some of those cards are strong, some of them are weak.
[Guest]: It varies from person to person, but how do you play with the cards that you're given?
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, before we go for a break, after which we'll discuss sort of your book
[Amit Varma]: on Nassim Rao, quick final sort of questions about your personal journey.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm curious about your teaching.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what is teaching like for you?
[Amit Varma]: Do you enjoy it?
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you're teaching political science and not history.
[Amit Varma]: And as you have been at pains to point out, in fact, the title of the episode could be
[Amit Varma]: Vinesh Sitapati, political scientist, not historian, not historian.
[Amit Varma]: So no, no, I'm just kidding.
[Amit Varma]: I won't do that to you.
[Amit Varma]: But so what is sort of teaching like and what does it mean to teach in a place like Ashoka,
[Amit Varma]: for example, because I've heard very good things about the place.
[Amit Varma]: And I've had many episodes with different faculty members, with different faculty members
[Amit Varma]: of Ashoka.
[Guest]: I've heard some of that.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, I've heard complaints from people saying, oh, Ashoka is becoming so woke
[Amit Varma]: and so this and so that.
[Amit Varma]: So what is it like teaching young people, you know, and how much does that change the
[Amit Varma]: person you are and the writer you are, the act of teaching, because just as the act of
[Amit Varma]: writing makes you a better thinker, I would imagine that the act of teaching makes you,
[Amit Varma]: you know, much more knowledgeable about the subject you're teaching, because after all,
[Amit Varma]: you have to explain it to Nani ji and to dozens of curious teenagers who are challenging you.
[Guest]: Yeah, no, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: So first off, again, I'm addressing to the non-academics who are hearing this.
[Guest]: Most people who do PhDs and want to be an academic don't do this for teaching, right?
[Guest]: Nobody says I want to do a PhD because I want to teach kids.
[Guest]: Nobody does that, right?
[Guest]: Then you're a school teacher.
[Guest]: If you're a university professor, the main focus is research.
[Guest]: It's not teaching.
[Guest]: And I was under this illusion too, that look, I've done my PhD, I want to write my books,
[Guest]: I want to do research, but for a living, I have to do some teaching, because, you know,
[Guest]: teaching is a revenue center, right?
[Guest]: Research is a cost center.
[Guest]: So I have to, in a university, learn to teach.
[Guest]: So I reluctantly said, look, let me do some teaching and let me be half decent at it.
[Guest]: But Ashoka kids make demands, right?
[Guest]: They work hard, they expect you to work hard.
[Guest]: And it has been transformative.
[Guest]: I've grown to love teaching, right?
[Guest]: My student evaluations are good.
[Guest]: I don't think students like me very much.
[Guest]: I think they respect me, right?
[Guest]: I try to be a tough teacher.
[Guest]: What I try when I teach is to tell students that, look, I'm not going to waste your time
[Guest]: by massaging your ego.
[Guest]: You know, your parents have paid good money to come here, Ashoka is an expensive education.
[Guest]: And instead, I'm going to try to add value to this to you.
[Guest]: So that at the end of this course, you said, okay, I, you know, paisa vasool toh hua hai.
[Guest]: And what does that look like?
[Guest]: It doesn't look like pandering, right?
[Guest]: But I'm going to tell you a bunch of things.
[Guest]: I'm also going to sort of focus on a ways to think about things.
[Guest]: So I've grown to like it and I've grown to enjoy it hugely.
[Guest]: I just spent a semester as a visiting associate professor at Princeton teaching Princeton
[Guest]: undergrads on Indian politics.
[Guest]: I like that too.
[Guest]: It's a totally different cultural context.
[Guest]: It has certainly helped my research in the sense that it has allowed me to ask questions
[Guest]: and demand answers that non students will not have the guts to ask, you know, one of
[Guest]: the beauties of being a 17 or 18 year old.
[Guest]: And let me give you this example.
[Guest]: When I was at Harvard Law School, I attended a talk where Amartya Sen was speaking.
[Guest]: And after he finished during the question answers, some undergrad got up and said, Professor
[Guest]: Sen, I don't think you understand the concept of supply and demand.
[Guest]: And he went on, right?
[Guest]: And you know what, when he finished, there was some giggling in the back of the audience.
[Guest]: But you know, Amartya Sen didn't giggle and he answered the question, right?
[Guest]: That's powerful.
[Guest]: Because sometimes you ask foolish supply and demand questions.
[Guest]: But sometimes 17, 18 year olds ask the nub of the questions, right?
[Guest]: And I think in the in the New Testament, if my memory serves, there's a line from the
[Guest]: Cornetian called to be a fool for the sake of Christ, right?
[Guest]: Say foolish things, say stupid things, because out of those four, five, one will be a brilliant
[Guest]: idea.
[Guest]: And undergrads really exemplify that, you know, they will often ask, you know, something
[Guest]: about the BJP or something about Narasimha Rao that is the correct question to ask.
[Guest]: But everybody else is too afraid to ask it because it sounds simple, right?
[Guest]: So undergrads really push you on that.
[Guest]: So you know, the BJP book, for example, before I wrote it, I took a course called right wing
[Guest]: politics in India, and right wing politics more generally, where I was looking at other
[Guest]: political parties also like AKP in Turkey, Likud in Israel, Christian, Christian Democrats
[Guest]: in Europe, who are also kind of center right parties to kind of nestle the BJP story.
[Guest]: Very, very helpful, you know.
[Guest]: So I have, you know, the teaching has been something that is not something that I imagined
[Guest]: I would like, but I like it.
[Guest]: And it gives me a lot of joy.
[Guest]: And frankly, it helps my work.
[Guest]: And there's a last thing, Amit, which is the researchers, right?
[Guest]: And people of the mind like you.
[Guest]: One of the things we suffer a lot is loneliness.
[Guest]: Because you know, you know, who, you know, it's not in an odd way, thinking is not a
[Guest]: group activity.
[Guest]: It's a solitary, solitary pursuit.
[Guest]: And if you're sitting in some library, or you're reading up, you know, when you're reading
[Guest]: a book in preparing, preparing for this, it's a lonely activity, you know, now, if you want
[Guest]: to put a spin on it, you call it solitude.
[Guest]: So which is why for the world of research, the world of teaching is great.
[Guest]: Because if you know, you're as a researcher, you're selfish, you know, self motivated.
[Guest]: As a teacher, you have to give more than you take, right?
[Guest]: And if a student, you know, shows you to be foolish, I actually enjoy it.
[Guest]: It means that, you know, I've trained my student to be smarter than me, right?
[Guest]: Also keeps you grounded.
[Guest]: I remember that, you know, I had gone for an interview with Dr. Manmohan Singh soon
[Guest]: after he stepped down as Prime Minister for the Nassim Mara book.
[Guest]: And he was, you know, elegance personified, you know, he spoke to me, he sat on the same,
[Guest]: you know, sofa that I did was reading, he saw me off, you know, he was in advanced years,
[Guest]: he saw me off outside, you know, outside his house to the car.
[Guest]: And then I went from there to Ashoka University, right?
[Guest]: And as it was the first or second day of class, and as I was entering in the mess, there was
[Guest]: a bunch of students, you know, in a circle, and they didn't know who I was.
[Guest]: So I overheard them.
[Guest]: And one of them says, you know, my teacher's name is Sitapati.
[Guest]: And the other kid shouted, he should have been called Ram.
[Guest]: And then all of them laughed, right?
[Guest]: And it brought me down to earth immediately, right?
[Guest]: And for all the criticisms you have of cocky 17, 18, 19 year olds, they have the ability
[Guest]: to bring you to earth very quickly.
[Amit Varma]: It's such a fantastic story about how you end up being called Ram and Ram Guha will
[Unknown]: be wondering at this and thinking that he would be Sitapati Guha somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: Does being a tenured professor change your perception of time and how quickly you need
[Amit Varma]: to do things and so on and so forth?
[Amit Varma]: Because I would imagine if you're a salaried person writing a book on the side, it's one
[Amit Varma]: kind of project.
[Amit Varma]: If you are, you know, just a freelancer or a journalist writing a book on the side, it's
[Amit Varma]: another kind of project.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a professor, you know, you've got more time, like you mentioned in your job,
[Amit Varma]: you get five months of the year when you can do whatever you want.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So how does that then play into the kind of books that you want to write or that you think
[Guest]: about?
[Guest]: It's an enormous luxury, enormous, right?
[Guest]: Like, as I said, I have no illusions that academia are the smartest people on earth.
[Guest]: I certainly don't think academics are the most curious people on earth, right?
[Guest]: Like most, you know, a lot of people outside of academia, many of them listening to your
[Guest]: podcast are more curious than academics, maybe smarter than most academics.
[Guest]: It's just that they have a regular job and they want to earn and they want to, you know,
[Guest]: support their family.
[Guest]: And these are all honorable things to do, right?
[Guest]: I'm deeply aware of that privilege, right?
[Guest]: Which is why I'm like, you know, if I, you know, if I'm not working on a book or an article,
[Guest]: I'm like, yaar, agar main nahi kar sakta hoon toh kaun karega?
[Guest]: Who should be, you know, because I've got a structure, I've got time, I've got, you
[Guest]: know, for this kind of thing, all power to those who hold regular jobs, and who want
[Guest]: to write, you know, this, you know, I read a book on Panipat, written amateur book on
[Guest]: Panipat, I mean, not amateur book, it's a very good book, but it's a historical book
[Guest]: on Panipat written by a eye doctor, who's doing this on the side, all power to him,
[Guest]: you know, I wish there were mechanisms in which people like that who are outside academia
[Guest]: formally, but who are brighter than most academics and more important, more curious and harder
[Guest]: working than most academics, who are able to engage with academia, academics can read
[Guest]: the early drafts, give back feedback, I hope that there's a mechanism in which the synergy
[Guest]: happens.
[Guest]: Because I'm very, very aware that I'm, I'm far luckier than they are.
[Guest]: And those you know, the and I don't use the word amateur in a negative way at all, I would
[Guest]: just mean that non academic historians or non academic writers, I'm deeply aware of
[Guest]: how passionate they must be, because they are fighting the demons at home, the demons
[Guest]: at work and yet producing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, even Narsimha Rao finally finished his book in his own day.
[Unknown]: That's right.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So let's let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And then we'll get to the crux of the matter, which is life in times of Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: Since April 2020, I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course, the art of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: And online community has now sprung up of all my past students.
[Amit Varma]: We have workshops, a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant community
[Amit Varma]: interaction.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know
[Amit Varma]: about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction, a lovely and lively community at the end of
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150 and is a monthly thing.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's IndiaUncut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm chatting with Vinay Sitapati on his excellent book Half Lion on PV Narsimha Rao.
[Amit Varma]: One final meta question before we actually get to the book itself and to Narsimha Rao
[Amit Varma]: itself, that out of all the possible subjects that you could have picked, you know, why
[Amit Varma]: this specific subject you've already spoken about how you wondered would this be interesting
[Amit Varma]: to people and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I agreed with you that it's a crucial period of our history.
[Amit Varma]: But why Narsimha Rao itself?
[Amit Varma]: And what did you think at the first was a core question behind the book, because one
[Amit Varma]: of the core questions that you've articulated is understanding how Narsimha Rao achieved
[Amit Varma]: so much despite having so little power.
[Amit Varma]: But at the start of this, did you have a sense of how little power he actually had?
[Guest]: No, I didn't.
[Guest]: I actually didn't know much more about Narsimha Rao than what was there in the Wikipedia entry.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it was actually quite lucky because I didn't come in with baggage, I didn't
[Guest]: come in with having to prove that I want to give Narsimha Rao his, you know, his space
[Guest]: in the spotlight.
[Guest]: I didn't have any of that.
[Guest]: I'm not Telugu.
[Guest]: You know, I have no particular interest in Narsimha Rao's like legacy, you know, in any
[Guest]: personal sense.
[Guest]: But as I told you right in the beginning of this conversation, you know, my own family's
[Guest]: fortunes and lives have changed in the early 90s.
[Guest]: And I intuitively knew that the early 90s was a period of change in India.
[Guest]: And while I was doing my PhD at Princeton, I had even organized or co-organized a conference
[Guest]: called the political consequences of economic growth, saying that when you have economic
[Guest]: growth in the 90s jumpstart, what are the political consequences?
[Guest]: And we had a panel there saying, what are the political predeterminants of economic
[Guest]: growth?
[Guest]: So what are the kind of politics you need for economic growth?
[Guest]: So I was thinking a little bit at that time about, look, what were the political conditions?
[Guest]: And Narsimha Rao, of course, was prime minister in the early 90s when liberalization happened.
[Guest]: And then I read a book which transformed me, which was a book by Ezra Vogel, who's I think
[Guest]: a Yale historian on Deng Xiaoping and it was called Deng Xiaoping and the Transformation
[Guest]: of China.
[Guest]: And it was a two biographies.
[Guest]: It was a biography of China changing in the 80s.
[Guest]: And it was a parallel biography of Deng Xiaoping who was instrumental in that change.
[Guest]: And I finished reading that book and I said, you know, a book like this needs to be written
[Guest]: about India and it's about India changing in the 90s and the Deng Xiaoping trigger was
[Guest]: this man called Narsimha Rao, who I didn't know much about.
[Guest]: But that's what piqued my interest because even then, and maybe as a political scientist,
[Guest]: I was like, look, change in India doesn't happen because of a blueprint or because of
[Guest]: ideas or because of a technocrat.
[Guest]: There also needs to be a political will.
[Guest]: How did that political story unfold?
[Guest]: And so that pushed me to Narsimha Rao, I still didn't know much.
[Guest]: And then I did some background research, I read up the secondary literature on the debates
[Guest]: on foreign policy changing in the 90s, economic policy, welfare schemes, and I said, ah, it's
[Guest]: not just that the first McDonald's came in the early 90s, a lot else changed in India.
[Guest]: And then I was lucky enough, you know, by talking to people, one of them introduced
[Guest]: me to Narsimha Rao's son, Prabhakar Rao, and I went all the way to Hyderabad to visit him.
[Guest]: And as I was going to visit him, I just thought, you know, I was going to Hyderabad, hometown
[Guest]: of Narsimha Rao, everybody would know who he is.
[Guest]: And I got into this cab from the airport, and I was driving to Narsimha Rao's son's
[Guest]: house for the first time, and I asked the cab driver, have you heard of Narsimha Rao?
[Guest]: And the guy thought for a second and said, yeah, he's the guy on whom the flyover is
[Guest]: named.
[Guest]: And so nobody knew about him, even in his hometown, that was a catastrophe, right?
[Guest]: And so I met Prabhakar Rao, and we got chatting, and then I met him a couple of times, I met
[Guest]: somebody else, others in his family.
[Guest]: And then he told me, look, Vinay, I've spoken to other members of my family, we've decided
[Guest]: to trust you.
[Guest]: Until then, he was still KG, come with me.
[Guest]: And I went with him to his, in his office, I went to an attic of his office, where there
[Guest]: were about 45 cartons, and he said, you can access it, right?
[Guest]: If there's anything sensitive, I trust that you will run it through me.
[Guest]: But otherwise, you can access it.
[Guest]: And I told myself at that time itself, that I'm so lucky to have to deal with an air who's
[Guest]: not like breathing down my neck, and not trying to, you know, censor everything I'm doing.
[Guest]: And then as I began to access the papers, I was mind blown.
[Guest]: I was like, this has never happened to any politician in India.
[Guest]: You know, Narsimha Rao, we had government documents with file notings on the left.
[Guest]: There were Narsimha Rao's private diaries, even his books in various languages, Marathi,
[Guest]: Hindi, English, I opened it and I could see his notings, right?
[Guest]: And so you had, you know, his letters, right?
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao was a was a fan of computers.
[Guest]: So on a dot matrix printer, he used to print out his diary, he used to write down his diary.
[Guest]: So for example, when Rajiv Gandhi denies him a ticket in April 91, to contest the Lok Sabha
[Guest]: elections, and so he's forced to retire.
[Guest]: He writes that this is one of the saddest days of my life.
[Guest]: So you have that level of intimacy, right?
[Guest]: Or another noting, the day after Rajiv has been murdered by the LTT, and his body has
[Guest]: been brought to 10 Janpath.
[Guest]: And all the congressmen are hovering around the body pretending to cry, but actually maneuvering
[Guest]: to see who will succeed him.
[Guest]: And Narsimha Rao as he is there, Pranab Mukherjee sides by Narsimha Rao and said, look, you
[Guest]: should be the heir, you should be the next person.
[Guest]: And Narsimha Rao writes in his diary, I kept quiet saying it shouldn't be me, it should
[Guest]: be N.D. Tiwari, knowing full well that N.D. Tiwari was unacceptable, because I knew the
[Guest]: kind of person Pranab Mukherjee is, right?
[Guest]: Think about it, right?
[Guest]: He, you know, you're getting that level of detail.
[Guest]: So you know, I'll be honest with you, Amit, the book success is primarily because I got,
[Guest]: you know, I, you know, I got my hands on this incredible resource, which is the private
[Guest]: archives of Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: I of course did about 100 interviews to supplement it, but it's really those private archives.
[Guest]: You know, if I had blown this up, you know, it would have been unforgivable, because after
[Guest]: being given this kind of access, you know, it would have been unforgivable had it been
[Guest]: a bad book.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a fantastic story.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I love the way you write about his early years as well.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, early on in your book, you write quote, living on the edge of five
[Amit Varma]: linguistic cultures, villagers here spoke Telugu, Hindi, Marathi, Kannada and even Samoria.
[Amit Varma]: And in this land of the Nizam, the language of power was Urdu, while the language of courtly
[Amit Varma]: life was Persian.
[Amit Varma]: Narsimha Rao would go on to speak 10 languages.
[Amit Varma]: These were the tongues he inherited at birth.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, he taught himself Tamil, as you mentioned at a later point in the book,
[Amit Varma]: because he went to some felicitation of his in Tamil Nadu and couldn't understand what
[Amit Varma]: was being said.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, he learned three computer languages when he was in his 60s.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when Rajiv Gandhi was saying that, you know, we need to enter the computer age
[Amit Varma]: or such like, our older politicians can't do it and he called up his son and said, send
[Amit Varma]: me a computer.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: And before you know it, not just send me a computer, he's not doing Google search.
[Guest]: He's programming in three languages.
[Guest]: Yeah, COBOL, BASIC and then you could write code in UNIX.
[Amit Varma]: And here's sort of my question.
[Amit Varma]: He's born in June 29th, 1921 in this village called Bangara.
[Amit Varma]: And this is 26 years before India becomes independent, right?
[Amit Varma]: This is, you know, to think that till the age of 26, his conception of India was not
[Amit Varma]: what our conception of India is.
[Amit Varma]: His conception of society was not what our conception kind of is.
[Amit Varma]: Most of the people around him was semi literate.
[Amit Varma]: You speak about at one point when he's growing up, his father realizes that this little boy
[Amit Varma]: of mine already knows more than the village teacher.
[Amit Varma]: So he has to be sent to another village where he is all alone at the age of seven, just
[Amit Varma]: for education.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, I can imagine that seven year old saying to himself, what you said to yourself
[Amit Varma]: when you got his papers that I can't waste this opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: And a seven year old must be thinking the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not as if you are figuring out thick desires and thin desires, or you know, what
[Amit Varma]: does a kid want?
[Amit Varma]: The kid has an opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: It is the only opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: He's got to get the job done, and that's kind of where he is.
[Amit Varma]: And as a person writing about history, I'm being very careful not to use the word historian,
[Amit Varma]: you will note.
[Amit Varma]: As a person telling stories about the past, do you make that mental effort of forgetting
[Amit Varma]: everything that we know now, and just putting yourself in the shoes of that little boy and
[Amit Varma]: tracing the journey that he is taking?
[Guest]: I try to do that, you know, it's hard, right?
[Guest]: Because I'm also keenly aware of the context.
[Guest]: And I think that's also important.
[Guest]: So to give you one example, Nasma was a bright kid, right?
[Guest]: And that's his all him.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't want to sound rude here, but the rest of his family are no patch on him.
[Guest]: And as I mentioned that it was a wealthy family, they were revenue intermediaries for the Nizam.
[Guest]: But it was not an educated family, right?
[Guest]: And part of that reason is structural, which you should know, which is that in Nizam's
[Guest]: Hyderabad state, most of the officials and bureaucrats were Muslim.
[Guest]: So for a Hindu, like Nasima Rao, the family, there was no particular government service
[Guest]: at the end of education.
[Guest]: So why, you know, why take to education, right?
[Guest]: You need to know this, right?
[Guest]: But you also need to know that he is a bright man.
[Guest]: So there's both going together.
[Guest]: So you have to have the internal world of Nasima Rao.
[Guest]: He's a man who has a felicity for languages.
[Guest]: But you should also know that he comes from a part of India, which is kind of, you know,
[Guest]: northern Telangana, right, very, very close to the Maharashtra border, where within a
[Guest]: few hours, you could find people who spoke Kannada, who spoke Odia, who spoke Marathi,
[Guest]: and of course, who spoke Telugu, right?
[Guest]: And that matters because when I went to his village Vangara, there were people there who
[Guest]: knew a smattering of Kannada, who knew some Odia, who knew Marathi, so both matter, right?
[Guest]: So as a biographer, I can't only look at the internal world of Nasima Rao, kind of the
[Guest]: triumph of the will, here's this bright man beating the odds, because the odds are determined
[Guest]: by the circumstance.
[Guest]: And that is a larger theme that, you know, runs through this book, which is this tension
[Guest]: between structure and agency.
[Guest]: I got to focus on Nasima Rao, but I got to look at the cards handed to him.
[Guest]: And the cards handed to him on language were actually a good set of cards, because he was
[Guest]: in the geographic absolute center of India, very close to Nagpur, but still in Telangana,
[Guest]: in what is today's Telangana, and so he had access to all these languages.
[Guest]: But you know what, he played those cards very well.
[Guest]: So I mentioned that between 77 and 1980, when the Moraji government is in power, the Congress
[Guest]: is out of power.
[Guest]: Nasima Rao is General Secretary in Delhi and has very little to do.
[Guest]: So you know what, what he does, he goes to JNU and enrolls in a Spanish language class
[Guest]: and learn Spanish, right?
[Guest]: And he drives his own car, parks his car in Jawaharlal Nehru University and learn Spanish,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Nobody else in his village does that.
[Guest]: And that's a good example of how agency and structure both matter in understanding Nasima
[Guest]: Rao.
[Guest]: Does that make sense, Amit?
[Amit Varma]: That makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm also sort of, like, I sometimes wonder that at one level, we are creatures of circumstance,
[Amit Varma]: like we discussed earlier, you know, combination of your genes and the things that happen to
[Amit Varma]: you and the life that you have.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, the structure and in many ways, you could say structure even determines
[Amit Varma]: the agency to some extent.
[Guest]: But they're separate, you know, they're separate, like, as I said, right, that, you know, there
[Amit Varma]: are lots of people who speak many languages in Nasima Rao's village.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody spoke 10.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: You know, so that's so and I don't want to see the Marxist reduce all possible agency
[Amit Varma]: to structure.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to do that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, whereas Hollywood reduces all structure to agency, you know, I don't do that either.
[Amit Varma]: So the question I was coming at is this, that one view is that we are creatures of circumstance
[Amit Varma]: to a large extent.
[Amit Varma]: The other view is that there is nevertheless something essential about people that survives
[Amit Varma]: through them.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I look back on myself as a young person, on the one hand, I don't know how
[Amit Varma]: anyone could have been friends with me when I was 20, because I was an absolute asshole.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And hopefully one has changed.
[Amit Varma]: And I would think I've changed enough to almost be a different person.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, there are some essential things that remain, like if you go on Facebook
[Amit Varma]: and you look at your school friends, and you might notice that they're all pretty much
[Guest]: the same.
[Guest]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they might be chubbier, they might look completely different, but the characteristics
[Amit Varma]: are basically the same.
[Amit Varma]: And in trying to get to the essential in Nasima Rao, I was struck by this paragraph you wrote
[Amit Varma]: about that separation at seven, when you wrote, quote, the separation of seven year old Rao
[Amit Varma]: from his family would haunt him for the rest of his life, shaken from the settled rhythms
[Amit Varma]: that centuries of cultivation had given his family.
[Amit Varma]: He was now on his own, visiting his parents only once every five months, education would
[Amit Varma]: propel Rao from village to town to city, into politics and into power, it would make him
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister of India.
[Amit Varma]: But it would also cut him off from clan and community.
[Amit Varma]: It would make him remote, squirreled away among ideas and words from which he could
[Amit Varma]: never be sent away.
[Amit Varma]: He would develop a distant relationship with his children, a beleaguered one with his eldest
[Amit Varma]: son Ranga, stop quote, and about his marriage, married at 10.
[Amit Varma]: And he resented that marriage.
[Amit Varma]: And he resented that that lasted 40 years, but he was at a distance from it.
[Amit Varma]: Most of the time he was somewhere else.
[Amit Varma]: He had other fulfilling relationships, as you point out, and everybody involved kind
[Unknown]: of goes through the motions.
[Amit Varma]: And that sense of him always being a perennial outsider, you know, sort of disaffected, never
[Amit Varma]: having close confidants, or at least not, not a multiplicity of them not having someone
[Amit Varma]: whom he could think of as his clan or his community, perhaps that's a sense he gets
[Amit Varma]: that he's a loner, this is a path he's on, he's maneuvering his way through it.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually history places him at this point in time, and he does what he has to
[Amit Varma]: do.
[Amit Varma]: Like, so when you read his papers, is, you know, that's one sense and am I correct in
[Amit Varma]: thinking that this seems essential to me, this para seems essential to me.
[Amit Varma]: Apart from that, what else do you sense about him?
[Amit Varma]: Like we have spoken of his sort of almost fatalistic tendency to accept the cards given
[Amit Varma]: to him and then do whatever is rational, whether it is in the wildness of not acting before
[Amit Varma]: the 84 riots, or whether it is in the enormous will that he did show in 91 when he took over
[Amit Varma]: with the country in a mess and acted to kind of resolve it.
[Amit Varma]: So if you had to, say, give an elevator speech description of Narasimha Rao, the person,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to someone who doesn't know anything about him, a man from Mars, what would you
[Guest]: say?
[Guest]: So I would say that the description you gave of an introvert, lonely introvert is a core
[Guest]: feature, but it's half the story.
[Guest]: The other half is that he's curious and action oriented.
[Guest]: So he has a bit of Hamlet, which is what you just described, and he has a bit of Don Quixote,
[Guest]: which is an actor, right?
[Guest]: So you know, the sort of I think it was Dostoevsky, but I could be wrong, who said that the two
[Guest]: great Western fictional figures is Hamlet and Don Quixote, one who thinks but doesn't
[Guest]: act, and the other who acts without thinking and Narasimha Rao exemplified both.
[Guest]: And I think that's important, because what you just described and the paragraph you just
[Guest]: read, gives rise to an introvert who loves books, who's a theoretician.
[Guest]: And that is a well known feature of Narasimha Rao, right?
[Guest]: Even a negative feature, the joke about him is analysis until paralysis, that he used
[Guest]: to pout without spouting, right?
[Guest]: And that gives rise to kind of the stereotype of a distant intellectual, who is like Nero,
[Guest]: you know, when the Rome is burning.
[Guest]: And that's absolutely not true.
[Guest]: That's half the story.
[Guest]: The other half is he was curious.
[Guest]: He was action oriented, you know, I spent some time talking about how he brings about
[Guest]: agricultural reforms in his own village, how he makes modification to the cotton plant
[Guest]: to push people from growing rice, you get less money from rice into growing cotton,
[Guest]: he goes to Gujarat, he gets the cotton seed, how as Prime Minister of India, I give so
[Guest]: many examples of how he's rolling his sleeves and is at the center of economic reforms.
[Guest]: He's not just a theoretician in the background.
[Guest]: His genius was that to pretend to be a theoretician, so that he did not get the blame for liberalization,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But the heart of the book is to show you the other end of the or the reverse of the para
[Guest]: that you quoted that here was an action oriented curious guy, who knew how to get the job done,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And so the duality of Narsimha Rao, which is why the title of the book is Half Lion,
[Guest]: is that he was half a thinker, but he was half a doer.
[Guest]: And at his best, this synergy between an intellectual with deep analytical skills, and a man who
[Guest]: understood every inch of the state and how to bring about transformation in India is
[Guest]: a central feature of the man.
[Guest]: So he had a bit the best of Don Quixote and the best of Hamlet, right?
[Guest]: I would say that duality at its best gives rise to Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: And that is really the central feature of this book.
[Guest]: If he was only a thinker, he would not have been able to transform India.
[Guest]: And if he was a doer, he wouldn't know what to transform and how to go about it.
[Amit Varma]: This is such a fascinating way to think about the man and, you know, just thinking of your
[Amit Varma]: book, for example, his period as Chief Minister, I think he was more Don Quixote than Hamlet.
[Unknown]: And we'll sort of get to that.
[Amit Varma]: Now, here's my other question, and a key way in which Narsimha Rao is different from so
[Amit Varma]: many people before and after him in Indian politics.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'd once written a column on Narendra Modi based on something a friend of his told
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: This person was friendly with him in the aughties, he worked with him in Gujarat.
[Amit Varma]: And she described how she was once at his home, and it was a gathering of personal friends
[Amit Varma]: and people he knew personally.
[Amit Varma]: And Mr. Modi started telling a story about how his mother had been very ill once.
[Amit Varma]: And he went to switch on the fan and he switched it on and the fan didn't turn on because there
[Amit Varma]: was no electricity.
[Amit Varma]: And as he said, narrated the story, he started crying.
[Amit Varma]: And my friend's point in telling me the story about Modi was that he is an experiential
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister, what I would call an aankho dekhi politician.
[Amit Varma]: So when he comes to power in Gujarat as Chief Minister, what are his priorities?
[Amit Varma]: It's electricity because he's experienced it himself.
[Amit Varma]: It's roads because he's walked on them, he's experienced it himself.
[Amit Varma]: But his great failing as a Prime Minister is that his knowledge is limited to that.
[Amit Varma]: He is not expanding his knowledge and there are some concepts which are beyond experience,
[Amit Varma]: spontaneous order, positive sum game, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that becomes his failing because then he cannot possibly get a handle on the economy
[Amit Varma]: or on the larger currents in society and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And the point of my column was read more because we form pictures of the world by joining dots,
[Amit Varma]: our experience only gives us so many dots.
[Amit Varma]: You have to read more.
[Amit Varma]: You can't blame Modi for not being a reader as a kid because circumstances, humble background,
[Amit Varma]: not his fault at all.
[Amit Varma]: But then what you should do is try to cultivate a reading habit and at least surround yourself
[Amit Varma]: with experts, people who know and, you know, not try to imagine that your folksy instincts
[Amit Varma]: will be right in every particular.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems that Narsimha Rao is not just the opposite of this, but that is in fact
[Amit Varma]: an outlier among politicians in the sense that one of the threads that struck me through
[Amit Varma]: your book is how this guy is constantly reading, reading, reading, learning, learning, learning.
[Amit Varma]: Even that example in his 60s, he gets a computer, he doesn't learn how to surf Google.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there wasn't Google then.
[Amit Varma]: He learns three computer languages.
[Amit Varma]: You've described in another incident that he goes to his village and there is some fancy
[Amit Varma]: machine which isn't working.
[Amit Varma]: And he actually opens it up himself, figures out that the steel is dry and that might be
[Amit Varma]: one reason the motor is not rotating and he has it lubricated with kerosene and the next
[Amit Varma]: day it works.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: So, and again, a man of action here.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really a combination in a sense of the introspective Hamlet thinking about
[Amit Varma]: stuff and Don Quixote actually acting on it.
[Amit Varma]: This I find remarkable because I, you know, I can't think of other figures in Indian society.
[Amit Varma]: Definitely Nehru, obviously a very well-read man and also a man of action, but also a man
[Amit Varma]: closed in certain ways to reconsidering his priors, whereas Narasimha Rao till the end
[Amit Varma]: of his life was always reconsidering his priors, most notably for liberalization, because he
[Amit Varma]: was a socialist until then.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about this sort of aspect of the man and how this played into what his trajectory
[Amit Varma]: was that like at one level, it is a bunch of accidents which take him to the top.
[Amit Varma]: At another level, it is the fact that he wasn't tribal and therefore he was always a contributor
[Amit Varma]: or a convenient compromise candidate, whether when he became chief minister or prime minister
[Amit Varma]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But was this urge also a big factor?
[Amit Varma]: And does it not make doubly tragic that the elites of Delhi, you know, look down on him
[Amit Varma]: almost as a country bumpkin kind of person?
[Amit Varma]: You know, there's a story where Rajiv Gandhi is sitting with a friend and Narasimha Rao,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just puts his foot on his lap and he's scratching his foot, which is like a
[Guest]: common...
[Guest]: His foot as in puts Narasimha Rao's foot.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, he puts his own foot on his lap and he's scratching it, as in fact, I'm practically
[Unknown]: doing now.
[Amit Varma]: My foot is on my lap as we speak right now, on my green sole chair.
[Amit Varma]: And Rajiv Gandhi's friend whispers in his ear and then with great disgust, you know,
[Amit Varma]: grabs a foot and puts it back down.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, they're treating him like a country bumpkin, but they are the well educated
[Amit Varma]: English speaking sophisticated country bumpkins and he's a man of learning and knowledge.
[Guest]: No, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: You know, that story is Rajiv Gandhi is, you know, sitting opposite Narasimha Rao and you
[Guest]: know, in the villages, sometimes you find somebody, people sitting cross legged or with
[Guest]: the foot, you know, on your other thigh and you're massaging your foot while talking,
[Guest]: you know, in elite, in sort of urban settings, you don't do that, but Narasimha Rao was doing
[Guest]: that and Rajiv Gandhi's friend whispers into Rajiv Gandhi and then, you know, puts Narasimha
[Guest]: Rao's foot down, which is quite humiliating, right?
[Guest]: But it brings to a different sort of insecurity that Narasimha Rao had, which is that he was
[Guest]: a man of enormous learning, right?
[Guest]: Yet it was a learning unmediated by the West.
[Guest]: So he, you know, I think English was the fifth language he learned.
[Guest]: So he was already a cosmopolitan, right?
[Guest]: He goes to, if my memory serves, he goes to the abroad to the US for the first time only
[Guest]: in 1952, right?
[Guest]: To visit his daughter Saraswati, who's having her first child.
[Guest]: He goes to New York and that's a transformative experience.
[Guest]: But you know, that's the first time he goes there.
[Guest]: He was an accomplished translator from Marathi to Telugu, from Hindi to Telugu.
[Guest]: He could campaign, you know, like in India, we know of people campaigning in two different
[Guest]: constituencies.
[Guest]: But when was the last time you heard of people campaigning simultaneously in Marathi and
[Guest]: in Telugu, right?
[Guest]: When he was campaigning in Hanamkonda, because he contested two seats, Hanamkonda and Ramtek.
[Guest]: Ramtek is near Nagpur in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: He's contesting in two languages.
[Guest]: And then he contests later on in Bairampur in Odisha and campaigns in Odia, right?
[Guest]: So here was a man under whom, you know, to be honest with you, Rajiv Gandhi is an intellectual
[Guest]: pygmy, right?
[Guest]: I mean, no disrespect to Rajiv Gandhi, but where and where are we talking about?
[Guest]: And yet look at the stereotypes we build for ourselves that somebody who goes to Cambridge
[Guest]: University and somebody who may have gone, you know, to an elite school, Doon School
[Guest]: or whatever is, I'm not sure Rajiv went there, I think he did.
[Amit Varma]: I think he went to Doon School.
[Guest]: He's just considered to be, you know, modern and intellectual cosmopolitan and Narsimha
[Guest]: Rao's seen as a country bumpkin.
[Guest]: As Natwar Singh told me, and I quoted in the book, Natwar Singh was former foreign minister
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: Unlike Nehru, Narsimha Rao did not have to discover India.
[Guest]: He already knew it.
[Guest]: He had a deep sense of the local indigenous culture of India and cultures of India.
[Guest]: You know, his Urdu was so good that when the president of Pakistan, Farooq Lagari comes
[Guest]: to Delhi, Narsimha Rao talks to him and his Urdu is better than Farooq Lagari's Urdu.
[Guest]: As a student, his Persian was excellent.
[Guest]: So this is a man who was an unusual cosmopolitan, but Amit, I have to emphasize this that lot
[Guest]: of people see this aspect to Narsimha Rao to the exclusion of his action oriented side.
[Guest]: They see this as the Hamlet side of Narsimha Rao, not the Don Quixote side.
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao had held every single position in India, you know, from a local position
[Guest]: to state minister, chief minister, union minister, before he became prime minister.
[Guest]: He had a ton of conventional experience.
[Guest]: In that sense, when Rajiv Gandhi died, he was a conventional candidate because he was
[Guest]: the most experienced candidate in government.
[Guest]: You know, there was talk of him as you mentioned earlier in this episode of him becoming president
[Guest]: of India in I think 1982 and again 1987.
[Guest]: So he was almost up there, right?
[Guest]: And so in some sense, he was an uncommon intellect.
[Guest]: He had uncommon experience and a man of action.
[Guest]: That combination is very, very, very hard to find, you know.
[Guest]: And I think India was, you know, this is one of the central points of the book that India
[Guest]: was very lucky to have a man with this kind of intellect, this kind of experience and
[Guest]: this kind of action oriented self when India had this kind of crisis in 1991.
[Guest]: So it was a, India, you know, should thank its stars that the confluence of events that
[Guest]: took place in 1991 was luckily in India's favor.
[Guest]: It could, you know, just imagine in a similar situation, Andy Tiwari, who is not a man of
[Guest]: action, who is not particularly learned and who has experience.
[Guest]: So I give him that, right?
[Guest]: He has been chief minister of, several times he has been chief minister of Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: Then he became chief minister of Uttarakhand.
[Guest]: But he lacks the other two, he's not a man of action.
[Amit Varma]: And he certainly is not an intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: But he was enormously virile.
[Amit Varma]: Apparently, he was bonking people well into his 80s, right?
[Guest]: There was a video, I think he was Andhra Pradesh governor.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a video, he had to step down as a consequence.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And he could have bonked India as well, if he was prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: What am I saying?
[Amit Varma]: Have I ever used a word like this on my show?
[Amit Varma]: But so to kind of continue, and what also struck me is that it's almost as if the rest
[Amit Varma]: of his life in different ways, was preparation for the role that he played in 91, like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the Don Quixote side of him in 1972, when he becomes chief minister of AP would
[Amit Varma]: have been a complete disaster in 92.
[Amit Varma]: I was, you know, looking at just immediately post-independency alliance against the Nizam.
[Amit Varma]: And you write about it, quote, the ensuing struggle against the Nizam brought together
[Amit Varma]: the unlikeliest of allies.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian National Congress wanted to dethrone him and integrate Hyderabad straight into
[Amit Varma]: secular democratic India.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindu Mahasabha and Arya Samaj disliked the Islamic ruler, and in Telangana region,
[Amit Varma]: an armed insurrection against landlords had morphed into a communist rebellion.
[Amit Varma]: These three elements gave rise to an anti-Nizam movement that was secular, religious and radical
[Amit Varma]: all at once, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And so there is a scaldron where there are all these different forces coming together.
[Amit Varma]: And Narasimha Rao is a young man, he's in his late 20s at this point, kind of watching
[Amit Varma]: all of this.
[Amit Varma]: He has, you know, one mentor in Ramananda Tirtha, who is more of a radical kind of leader.
[Amit Varma]: Another leader is sort of Burgula Ramakrishna Rao, as you describe, much more moderate.
[Guest]: He becomes the first chief minister of Hyderabad state.
[Amit Varma]: Who becomes the first chief minister and much more moderate and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And this is the point you write about how Narasimha Rao decides not to choose sides.
[Amit Varma]: Like his daughter Eswani Devi described him as an ajat shatru, someone with no enemies.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, this also seems like a really fundamental quality in what he achieved in 1991 onwards.
[Amit Varma]: Because you know, just building that consensus, bringing people together, making it happen,
[Amit Varma]: sort of all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about those early years.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of politician was he?
[Amit Varma]: Was he an ambitious politician?
[Amit Varma]: Did he want to rise to the top?
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense of those sort of years?
[Amit Varma]: Like your first chapter is, this chapter is titled Andhra Socialist 1921-71, 50 years,
[Amit Varma]: big span of time.
[Amit Varma]: What's happening as he gets from here to there?
[Guest]: So two things, Amit.
[Guest]: One is that to understand what Narasimha Rao is up to in this period, you know, 51-71,
[Guest]: you have to understand the structure of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: The Congress Party is India at that time.
[Guest]: Some of your younger listeners may find that hard to believe when they see today's Congress
[Guest]: Party, but the Congress was India.
[Guest]: And the Congress structure was built around different factions, right?
[Guest]: So there was no opposition party of any worth.
[Guest]: So the opposition parties of India were within the Congress.
[Guest]: So there was a left wing, there was a right wing, there was a Dalit wing, there was a
[Guest]: Brahmin wing, there was a pro-landlord wing, there was a pro-tenant wing, there was a pro-farmer
[Guest]: wing, there was a pro-consumer wing.
[Guest]: That's the nature of Congress Party.
[Guest]: And at another level, there was a Burgul Ramkrishna Rao wing, there was a Ramananthirtha wing.
[Guest]: In other words, there were factions which are based on personalities as much as ideology,
[Guest]: something that you see in India even today.
[Guest]: So you and I, Amit, are in Maharashtra.
[Guest]: And if you look at the Congress today in Maharashtra, well, it may be very small, but even so there's
[Guest]: a Prithviraj Chavan wing, there's a Ashok Chavan wing, etc., etc.
[Guest]: That's just a structure of the Congress, right?
[Guest]: And when all these different wings and faction leaders are fighting about who should become
[Guest]: chief minister, no one of them can become chief minister because the others threaten
[Guest]: to leave.
[Guest]: And what you end up with is a consensus candidate, right?
[Guest]: That's what you end up with.
[Guest]: Nassim Rao's genius was he was always a consensus candidate because he never had a faction behind
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: He never sought to cultivate people.
[Guest]: He never sought to build a power base.
[Guest]: Now, this might sound foolish, you know, in politics, you should have chamchas, you should
[Guest]: have cronies.
[Guest]: Nassim Rao lacked this.
[Guest]: That's why he was seen as safe by everybody around him.
[Guest]: That's why in 1971, he becomes chief minister of Andhra Pradesh.
[Guest]: And I must emphasize here for those of you who haven't read the book Half Lion that,
[Guest]: that period 1971 to 73 is very important in understanding Nassim Rao because that's when
[Guest]: he is Don Quixote, you know, Indira Gandhi selects him because she wants to push for
[Guest]: a left wing reform, which is land reform in Andhra Pradesh.
[Guest]: She wants to move, land has already moved from the zamindars to the revenue intermediaries,
[Guest]: the Deshmukhs or the Doras, who are the spine of the Congress party.
[Guest]: These are the Reddys, the Brahmins, the Khammas.
[Guest]: And Indira Gandhi wants to move the next level to give land to the tiller and to the landless
[Guest]: Dalits.
[Guest]: And that's what Nassim Rao decides to do.
[Guest]: He gives provocative speeches.
[Guest]: This antagonizes landlords.
[Guest]: This antagonizes other castes such as Khammas and Reddys.
[Guest]: They protest against him.
[Guest]: And Nassim Rao who feels he's in an honorable cause, he's a rebel, he's a revolutionary,
[Guest]: he goes all out, he goes on the forefront.
[Guest]: The protests he gets are so strong, Nassim Rao has to step down.
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi asks him to step down and he feels his career is over.
[Guest]: The big lesson he learns from this is that if you want to bring about reform, you have
[Guest]: to do it through the back door.
[Guest]: You have to do it subtly, otherwise the enemies to reform will gang up against you and you
[Guest]: will have, you will be destroyed, you will have to step down.
[Guest]: It's the single biggest learning he takes as Prime Minister.
[Guest]: There's no doubt in his mind that India has to change on economics, on welfare schemes,
[Guest]: on foreign policy, but he has to do it in a way that doesn't antagonize his enemies,
[Guest]: that doesn't antagonize those who are upholding the older order.
[Guest]: For that you need subterfuge, you need to pretend to not do anything while doing something.
[Guest]: That is Nassim Rao's great genius and he learns that by being a failure as Chief Minister.
[Guest]: Now look, many Chief Ministers in India fail, many politicians fail.
[Guest]: What makes Nassim Rao unique is he converts his own failure into a learning experience
[Guest]: and he realizes what not to do and when he comes back to power, he's a chastened man,
[Guest]: which means you must reform, you must change, India has to change, but you have to do it
[Guest]: in a way in which you pretend to continuity and that is the genius of Nassim Rao.
[Amit Varma]: And the other lesson in this and I wonder if you would say that it's an early example
[Amit Varma]: of the Congress's centralizing impulse is in that concept of the nominated Chief Minister,
[Amit Varma]: that basically Indira Gandhi took over power at the center, started centralizing power
[Amit Varma]: and decided that she wanted a Chief Minister who would do her bidding, not necessarily
[Amit Varma]: someone who has roots and who has independent power of her own and in a sense, she's kind
[Amit Varma]: of trying to gather weak men who cannot threaten her around herself and Nassim Rao being an
[Amit Varma]: early version of this and this then leads to the dilemma that while he is politically
[Amit Varma]: weak, the reason he is there is he doesn't have backing of his own.
[Amit Varma]: He's not a, you know, mass leader in that sense, so he always won the elections he contested,
[Amit Varma]: but except the very first one, but he's not a mass leader in that sense and he's politically
[Amit Varma]: weak, but he's been put in a position of strength, but he can't really do much in that position
[Amit Varma]: of strength as he finds out when he's in his Don Quixote phase.
[Amit Varma]: And is there something broader also happening here that what happened to him in the microcosm
[Amit Varma]: is also happening at a larger level, where Indira Gandhi by strengthening herself actually
[Guest]: weakens the Congress?
[Guest]: Oh, absolutely.
[Guest]: I mean, I would look upon that period, which is 1967, 68, 69, 70, all the way to 71, as
[Guest]: I would say the worst four years in India's first republic, because by deinstitutionalizing
[Guest]: the Congress by doing exactly what you said, Indira Gandhi sets the tone for other political
[Guest]: parties.
[Guest]: So all the regional parties, caste based parties that are growing in India post 1967, they
[Guest]: are looking at the Indira Gandhi model of the Congress, not the Nehru model of the Congress.
[Guest]: And even today, if you look at the state we are in, right, Shiv Sena is completely deinstitutionalized.
[Guest]: You know, the father headed the Shiv Sena, now the son heads it and his chief minister
[Guest]: and, you know, soon the grandson will head it, right, Aditya Thackeray would head it.
[Guest]: And in doing so, you know, older leaders, leaders who want to rise will go, you know,
[Guest]: will be furious, right?
[Guest]: The same deinstitutionalized story you are seeing in the DMK to some extent, right?
[Guest]: The father has given way to Stalin.
[Guest]: And a lot of the regional bosses are like, when will our turn come, right?
[Guest]: So that's, so the tragedy that you mentioned that is going on during this period, 67 to
[Guest]: 71, is not just something Indira Gandhi inflicts on the Congress.
[Guest]: It's something that by mimicking, right, all other political parties bar the communists
[Guest]: and the BJP are mimicking, are taking from Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: And I think that's a serious tragedy.
[Guest]: And I think one of the big problems in Indian politics is how deinstitutionalized and hollowed
[Guest]: out parties have become in India.
[Guest]: And I worry that that period set the template for it.
[Amit Varma]: And did that then also make feudalism inevitable?
[Amit Varma]: For example, I was telling you just before this that I read this delightful sort of essay
[Amit Varma]: on Leela Naidu by one of her friends, where Leela Naidu, he mentions at one point that
[Amit Varma]: when she grew older, she would constantly share gossip with him.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the pieces of gossip that she shared is that she had heard that Indira Gandhi's
[Amit Varma]: daughters-in-law kept the fridge locked, so that the servants could not access the food
[Amit Varma]: because they were worried the servants would steal the food.
[Amit Varma]: So they didn't care if the food went to waste.
[Amit Varma]: But they kept the fridge locked because they wanted control of it.
[Amit Varma]: And that feels like what the Gandhis have actually done to the Congress Party today.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, when I mentioned this before the recording, you gave the counterpoint to that,
[Amit Varma]: that in 2009, one would not have said this.
[Amit Varma]: But that is kind of where we are.
[Amit Varma]: But then does that centralizing impulse inevitably mean that there will be feudalism?
[Amit Varma]: Because if there aren't alternative leaders around a leader to challenge them, then the
[Amit Varma]: family or the people, you know, in the greatest proximity to power will eventually make sure
[Amit Varma]: they hold the power and their popular leaders simply therefore aren't allowed to emerge
[Guest]: in any way.
[Guest]: Yeah, and I think it's, yeah, I completely agree with you.
[Guest]: And it goes one step further, which is over time, family control of political parties
[Guest]: become a self-fulfilling prophecy, right?
[Guest]: Which is that the family says that look, unless we have a family, the second-rung leaders
[Guest]: are so corrupt and so self-serving, that they will split the party and destroy the party.
[Guest]: That unfortunately also happens to be true.
[Guest]: So today, if you say that Sonia Gandhi and Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi should leave
[Guest]: the party, I don't quite trust the others in the political party, right?
[Guest]: But that is a consequence of now several decades of hauling out that began with Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi is right to say that eventually there was nobody but Indira Gandhi who could
[Guest]: hold the party together, but that's a process that she started.
[Guest]: And so, you know, Sonia Gandhi today is in this conundrum, right?
[Guest]: Which is that it is a feudal party in the sense that, you know, or let's say it's a
[Guest]: family-based party, but the alternative to a family-based party might even be worse.
[Guest]: It may not be a democratic party, right?
[Guest]: The instincts of the second-tier Congress leaders that we see today are not particularly
[Guest]: non-feudal, right?
[Guest]: So you are choosing between two suboptimal or two worse outcomes.
[Guest]: In one outcome, you have the Nehru-Gandhis in power, in the other outcome, you don't
[Guest]: have them in power and things are even worse in the Congress, right?
[Guest]: So I do feel that that period is a terrible period in India and it could have gone differently.
[Guest]: I mean, frankly, Indira Gandhi, had she not done this, maybe in the 1971 elections, the
[Guest]: Congress would have lost, but you know, they lost six years later in 1977.
[Guest]: All that meant was Indira Gandhi six years earlier would have been in opposition, she
[Guest]: would have come back to power, but she wouldn't have destroyed the party for just three, four
[Guest]: extra years in power.
[Amit Varma]: And is it inevitable in just the structure of parties and the nature of power?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the structure of parties in India, but the nature of power is universal in that
[Amit Varma]: power corrupts always.
[Amit Varma]: So is it then necessary that even a party like the BJP will eventually go down that
[Amit Varma]: road?
[Amit Varma]: Like at one point, you could have said that institutionally is pretty decentralized, you've
[Amit Varma]: got local leaders, you've got shit happening.
[Amit Varma]: Recently, one hears about how, you know, Modi and Shah have centralized a lot of the power
[Amit Varma]: and you have perhaps one rival power source coming up in Adityanath.
[Amit Varma]: As someone who studied the BJP really closely, do you feel that, you know, there is a move
[Amit Varma]: in that direction?
[Amit Varma]: Or are there safeguards within the party, which will not allow it to happen?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, what are those safeguards that were not there in the Congress?
[Guest]: So I actually pushed back a little bit, I don't think it's inevitable, right?
[Guest]: I don't think what Indira Gandhi did in the early 19, in the late 60s, early 70s was inevitable.
[Guest]: I think power corrupts, but that doesn't follow that the cadre is destroyed and one individual
[Guest]: seizes power.
[Guest]: It doesn't follow.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I'll give you the DMK example that even though Stalin is in power, they still have somewhat
[Guest]: of a cadre, the communists, of course, they don't have power, but they still have somewhat
[Guest]: of a cadre.
[Guest]: The BJP definitely has a strong cadre, right?
[Guest]: And it remains so and the RSS plays a big role in keeping that happening.
[Guest]: I would, I would actually say the following that given that Modi is so much more popular
[Guest]: than his party, right, it is surprising that in the in the in the BJP, both Amit Shah and
[Guest]: Modi follow the formal protocols of the party, even though they don't have to, right?
[Guest]: And I would say that after Modi and after Amit Shah, the BJP's health will be immeasurably
[Guest]: better than it was when they took the party.
[Guest]: So I'm actually going to stick my neck out and say that both Amit Shah and Modi are institutional
[Guest]: builders.
[Guest]: It is the reality in India today that Modi, you know, is the number one leader in the
[Guest]: BJP.
[Guest]: And the number two leader is actually number 10, because Modi is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
[Guest]: 9.
[Guest]: And the next leader, you can call it Adityanath, Amit Shah, whoever, is actually the 10th most
[Guest]: popular leader in the BJP.
[Guest]: And that even though Modi is a centralizer, his instincts, he has not destroyed the party,
[Guest]: the party still has autonomous centers, the RSS is still autonomous, the reason they go
[Guest]: behind him is actually a pretty simple reason, he wins elections.
[Guest]: If he stops winning elections, people in the BJP will complain, right?
[Guest]: So I'll actually push back on that just to tell you that there is an alternate model
[Guest]: that the Congress could have followed, which is, but it would have been a party would then
[Guest]: would have had to focus on an ideological core, and would have had to articulate an
[Guest]: ideological, not just a catch all party, but a certain clear ideology.
[Guest]: In the 1960s, that ideology sometimes wins, you sometimes loses, the BJP had the same
[Guest]: ideology for 100 years.
[Guest]: And they have won elections, they have lost elections, the Congress's tragedy and Indra's
[Guest]: tragedy was, she could not conceive of an India without the Congress.
[Guest]: And she was willing to do what it takes to just give the Congress a little more power
[Guest]: for a little more years.
[Guest]: And that came at the cost of the destruction of the party.
[Guest]: So I'm going to push back and look, many people disagree with me on this saying that look
[Guest]: in India, the de institutionalization of a party is the norm is inevitable.
[Guest]: And that power corrupts, right?
[Guest]: And an individual in power will always try to, you know, make it a mom and pop show.
[Guest]: I don't think it was inevitable.
[Guest]: That's certainly not the party that Nehru ran.
[Guest]: There was no reason that that would be the party that Indira Gandhi ran.
[Amit Varma]: I think, you know, as a former poker player, I can come at it from, I can cite the law
[Amit Varma]: of truly large numbers, and the law of truly large numbers basically is that given enough
[Amit Varma]: iterations, everything is inevitable, the most unlikely event is inevitable.
[Amit Varma]: And here, I would say given enough iterations, power will corrupt even if it doesn't corrupt
[Amit Varma]: a particular set of people on top.
[Amit Varma]: Because but what you are saying is that within the BJP, there are institutional safeguards.
[Guest]: Why should the sentence power corrupts mean that a party becomes personality centric that
[Guest]: doesn't follow because frankly, carders expand the power of the party expand like Modi likes
[Guest]: having a committed carder, because he wins elections.
[Guest]: If he destroys the carder, he may lose elections, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I think what you're saying is that the BJP has enough institutional safeguards such
[Amit Varma]: as a very presence of the RSS behind it, that makes sure that that personality cult cannot
[Amit Varma]: form even if power was to corrupt.
[Guest]: Also, I don't you know, let me stick my neck out a second time.
[Guest]: I don't think Modi believes in his personality cult.
[Guest]: I think Modi fully recognizes that you need a party, you need social media, you need money.
[Guest]: You know, it's not that you know, the the old story where you know, Indira Gandhi would
[Guest]: you know, put a you know, the joke was if Indira Gandhi even puts a lamppost as a candidate,
[Guest]: the lamppost will win.
[Guest]: Modi well realizes that's not the case.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, but my point is that it's not about Modi, forget Modi tomorrow, it could be Adityanath
[Amit Varma]: day after it could be Yati, it could be anybody else.
[Amit Varma]: And inevitably, if you have a large enough sample size, there will be someone corrupted
[Amit Varma]: enough to try to centralize power.
[Amit Varma]: And your point is that's not possible within the BJP because there are enough safeguards
[Amit Varma]: which they want in the Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Is that correct?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And you know, they may centralize power, but it may not be in the cost of having a coherent
[Guest]: carder.
[Guest]: What Indira does is, you know, destroys any, you can still have ultimate power with the
[Guest]: Prime Minister, but give chief ministers with some like, today, you know, the chief ministers
[Guest]: of the BJP, whether Shivraj Singh Chauhan, you name it, right, Adityanath are not puppets
[Guest]: of Modi.
[Guest]: I don't think that's the right sentence, right?
[Guest]: In fact, if anything, Shivraj Singh Chauhan was a competitor of Modi, right, for Prime
[Guest]: Ministership, yet he's Prime, he's Chief Minister.
[Guest]: This would be unthinkable in the Congress Party.
[Guest]: And the reason I'm sort of jostling with you on this, Amit, is not just to create a rare
[Guest]: point of disagreement between us, because I think that's important too.
[Amit Varma]: I love the disagreement.
[Amit Varma]: One thing I don't disagree because we are so polite on the show, but disagreement for
[Amit Varma]: them is Twitter screaming.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no, but you know, because we seem to agree on a lot, I want to at least have
[Guest]: one or two differences.
[Guest]: But I want to emphasize here as a political scientist with all my heart, that the tragedy
[Guest]: of the Congress, especially the tragedy of the Congress Party organization was not inevitable.
[Guest]: And it was a series of choices that began with Indira Gandhi, and then became a self-fulfilling
[Guest]: prophecy because she handed out down to her, you know, to Rajiv Gandhi, she handed down
[Guest]: a such a corrupt party, that Rajiv said, I have to further centralize, otherwise, am
[Guest]: I going to give these jokers decentralized power?
[Guest]: But that was not inevitable.
[Guest]: It was something that Indira Gandhi created.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that's an open question, I guess we are actually talking past each other, because
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even talking about the current BJP.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just saying in the larger scheme of things, you know, given enough leaders, somebody or
[Amit Varma]: the other is going to try the same thing that Indira tried in the BJP as well.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe not in the, maybe the question is moot because the sample size you need for
[Amit Varma]: that is too large.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to Narsimha Rao.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, you speak about how that period as Chief Minister ended disastrously, even
[Amit Varma]: though he was well intentioned, he was trying to do things like reduce land holdings to
[Amit Varma]: such an extent that his own land holdings would be decimated, right?
[Amit Varma]: But he's and despite opposition within, you know, half the cabinet, because they are,
[Amit Varma]: of course, you know, of landlords, they're landlords.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and he did that.
[Amit Varma]: And you write at one point, and this is a lovely sentence, quote, Narsimha Rao, the
[Amit Varma]: Chief Minister was pouring kerosene all over himself, all that was needed was a matchstick,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And so okay, eventually, the Chief Ministership is set on fire, he's sacked, game is over.
[Amit Varma]: Now he's in exile for a couple of years, where he is, you know, not in a political position
[Amit Varma]: anymore.
[Amit Varma]: How did that exile change him?
[Guest]: That's an important question, Amit, because, and just take a step back for a second.
[Guest]: Most politicians don't know what to do with exiles, because they are 24-7 politicians,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Exile means that you've lost an election, you've stepped down as Chief Minister, all
[Guest]: the hundreds of people waiting to meet you have disappeared.
[Guest]: There's nobody willing to meet you.
[Guest]: If you don't have hobbies, what else do you do?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao was very good at exile because he had hobbies.
[Guest]: You know, he could even paint, he could, you know, he could read books, right, he could
[Guest]: learn languages, you know, he could, you know, when the first exile between 1973 and 74,
[Guest]: he begins to write the book that would eventually become the Insider, right?
[Guest]: So he knew, he had things to occupy himself during exile.
[Guest]: This is very rare for politicians, which is why politicians when they are in exile, and
[Guest]: all politicians will be in exile at some point or other, make foolish mistakes like leaving
[Guest]: the party, making statements, making compromises to get back to power, to get something to
[Guest]: get a Rajya Sabha ticket, Narsimha Rao didn't have to do that.
[Guest]: And I think that's what made him unique.
[Guest]: The other person, by the way, who had this is Atal Bihari Vajpayee, who was a man with
[Guest]: a lot of interest, poetry, he loved the good life, he had, like Narsimha Rao, he had a
[Guest]: philosophical attitude to life.
[Guest]: So when he was not in power, right, he had things to occupy himself, when he was sidelined
[Guest]: in my first book, I point out that from roughly 1985, all the way to 1995, for 10 years, he
[Guest]: had been exiled from his party functionally, but you know, he knew things to occupy himself,
[Guest]: he didn't do anything foolish as leaving the party, splitting the party, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So Narsimha Rao was both used to exile, and B, did not do anything foolish during exile,
[Guest]: which meant that when the stars realigned, Indira Gandhi got him back as General Secretary,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Again, in 1991, a few months before the elections, when Rajiv Gandhi basically kicked him out
[Guest]: of politics, Narsimha Rao said, fine, I'm going to use this exile, I'm going to become
[Guest]: a monk in the Kotralam monastery, and I'm going to become a Hindu monk, I'm going to
[Guest]: close my bank accounts, right?
[Guest]: Somebody else could have said, who does Rajiv Gandhi think he is, put a press conference,
[Guest]: etc, etc.
[Guest]: And you know what, if he had done that, and Rajiv Gandhi had been assassinated, the Congress
[Guest]: wouldn't have gone to him to become Prime Minister, they went to him to become Prime
[Guest]: Minister because he accepted his exile with grace.
[Guest]: And I want to give you the contrary picture of N.D. Tiwari, also who was in his last legs
[Guest]: in the 1991 elections, and Rajiv had told him don't contest the Lok Sabha elections.
[Guest]: But N.D. Tiwari was worried that his chance to become Chief Minister in 91 was ending
[Guest]: in UP.
[Guest]: And as you know, as your readers know, the Samadwadi party, etc comes to power, the Congress
[Guest]: has been finished since then, has never come back in UP.
[Guest]: So N.D. Tiwari knew this.
[Guest]: So he disobeyed an order of Rajiv Gandhi and stood for Lok Sabha elections in UP and lost.
[Guest]: And that's one of the main reasons why he could not become Prime Minister when Rajiv
[Guest]: died, because he had disobeyed an order of Rajiv Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: So this is an example of Narasimha Rao who doesn't make foolish decisions during his
[Guest]: exile.
[Guest]: I'll give you a third example, Amit, which is in 1977 to 1980, another period of exile
[Guest]: for Narasimha Rao.
[Guest]: As all of you know, that's when the Janata government is in power, Indira Gandhi, cases
[Guest]: have been filed against Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: Many of Indira Gandhi's close supporters like YB Chavan leave the Congress during this period.
[Guest]: Narasimha Rao doesn't leave the Congress.
[Guest]: What does he do?
[Guest]: He goes to JNU to learn Spanish.
[Guest]: He doesn't make a foolish mistake, right?
[Guest]: He bides his time.
[Guest]: So in 1980, when Indira Gandhi comes back to power, Narasimha Rao is one of the few
[Guest]: people to have remained loyal to Indira Gandhi during the three years in which she had been
[Guest]: hounded by everybody else.
[Guest]: So how does Indira Gandhi reward him?
[Guest]: She makes him Foreign Minister of India, which is one of the top four ministries in the Union
[Guest]: Cabinet.
[Guest]: It tells you that Narasimha Rao's big talent was that he knew how to occupy himself during
[Guest]: exile, and he did not make foolish short term decisions to come back to power during exile.
[Guest]: He knew that, look, he had a philosophical turn, what goes down comes up, you know, and
[Guest]: that's exactly what happens to him.
[Guest]: I know that's a long answer to your question, but does that make sense?
[Amit Varma]: Makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: And long answers are the best answers because they have the best chance of carrying complexity.
[Amit Varma]: And at this time, like you said earlier, he also made an American trip.
[Amit Varma]: He visited his daughter and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And this time being 1973-74, so is this a significant trip?
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that we look at as changing his outlook in any way in the sense that he
[Amit Varma]: was a classic socialist all the time before that, you know, even when he was a modernizer,
[Amit Varma]: as you've pointed out in the 60s, it was a modernizer from a point of view of the state
[Amit Varma]: doing modernizing things and not, you know, liberalizing and enabling people and markets
[Amit Varma]: to do what they do.
[Amit Varma]: So did this sort of, and he had a love for technology, you point out how on another trip
[Amit Varma]: he brought back a Texas calculator for his son and all of that, he was into that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, he's in India all his life, he goes to the US, he sees how life there
[Amit Varma]: is so much better and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Does that, you know, change his outlook?
[Amit Varma]: You also mentioned at one point that he realizes when he's spending time in his village with
[Amit Varma]: villagers that the land reforms alone haven't changed anything, that they're still poor,
[Amit Varma]: and that therefore the handouts don't solve the problem, you also need to connect them
[Amit Varma]: to markets where they can flourish through voluntary trade with others.
[Amit Varma]: And in some cases, he manages to do that where he moves them from rice, which is an unprofitable
[Amit Varma]: crop to other cash crops, and, you know, they enter markets and start making money.
[Amit Varma]: So is there some kind of discernible metamorphosis happening in ideological terms?
[Amit Varma]: Because initially, why he was socialist in his 60s, what else could you be back then?
[Amit Varma]: You know, I can't, it's easy to sit here in 2022 and talk about economic freedom and this
[Amit Varma]: and that.
[Amit Varma]: At that point in time, there was no exposure to those ideas, there wasn't widespread understanding
[Amit Varma]: of the failures of socialism as we have today.
[Amit Varma]: So that's completely understandable.
[Amit Varma]: But over time, do we see sort of a gradual shift?
[Amit Varma]: And also in general, through reading his papers, writing this biography, what comment would
[Amit Varma]: you have on his openness to new ideas, which is also a remarkably important quality, a
[Amit Varma]: quality which, for example, Nehru didn't have, right, much to our nation's detriment, you
[Amit Varma]: know, and no politician, I mean, I can't think of any politicians who really have as much
[Amit Varma]: of that as Narsimha Rao clearly did.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of his intellectual journey?
[Guest]: So I think to answer the first part of your question, that trip he makes in 73-74 to the
[Guest]: US is transformative, right?
[Guest]: You know, he travels quite a bit in the, I mean, in within New York, he's traveling,
[Guest]: he's amazing, you know, he buys calculators from Texas Instruments, he goes to Wisconsin,
[Guest]: and he meets, you know, this famous Telugu scholar, Velchiru Narayan Rao.
[Guest]: And in, you know, Madison, Wisconsin, he, you know, he's invited for dinner, and he
[Guest]: finds the best Telugu food.
[Guest]: And he's saying, you know, all these ingredients you're getting here in the Midwest, I can't
[Guest]: even get in North India, you know.
[Guest]: So he sees the power of American capitalism, and he sees the dynamism and entrepreneurship
[Guest]: in America quite clearly, right?
[Guest]: And the next time he's visiting the US, he's now an expert on the US.
[Guest]: So his eldest daughter, who's, who's accompanying him, who I think is semi literate, she sees
[Guest]: a washing machine, she doesn't use know how to use it, and I'll teach you how to use the
[Guest]: washing machine.
[Guest]: He's now the expert, he's been this, you know, second time.
[Guest]: So he definitely is very excited, like a child about the, you know, entrepreneurship, technological
[Guest]: improvement in the US, that directly manifests itself when he's foreign minister.
[Guest]: So in 1980, to onwards, when he's foreign minister, you also see India moving away from
[Guest]: the Soviet Union towards the US, right?
[Guest]: That doesn't manifest itself in his economic policies.
[Guest]: So Narsimha Rao, one of the things I realized was that on economics, he was a cipher until
[Guest]: 1991.
[Guest]: It was the, you know, he had held so many positions from Hindu, Hindu Endowment Board,
[Guest]: you know, industry, defense, foreign policy, he had held all this, he'd never held economics
[Guest]: or sorry, he had not held industry either.
[Guest]: So he never held finance, economics, he never held these positions.
[Guest]: There's nothing in his archives that showed that the either the US trip or his in the
[Guest]: 80s, his economic thinking had changed, you know, he didn't have much to think about it,
[Guest]: whatever little he thought about it was still protectionist.
[Guest]: It was really 1991 that transformed him and he realized the crisis, he realized that we
[Guest]: had to change.
[Guest]: I think it's amazing that he changes on, he just flips on a dime at that point, right?
[Guest]: And I was actually looking in the 70s for this aha moment where he realizes the importance
[Guest]: of liberalization and the importance of capitalism.
[Guest]: I just couldn't find it, you know, there's a very famous story, possibly apocryphal of
[Guest]: Gorbachev, right, traveling in the United States.
[Guest]: And I think his car breaks down somewhere, it's an apocryphal story, I haven't been able
[Guest]: to find a footnote.
[Guest]: And you know, there's a Walmart nearby, he goes there to a Walmart, right, in rural America,
[Guest]: and he's amazed at the range of things that Walmart carries.
[Guest]: And suddenly he has a eureka moment that he, right, as the head of Soviet Union, as a Soviet
[Guest]: elite has less products he can buy in Moscow, than a rural American farmer who goes to Walmart
[Guest]: in rural America.
[Guest]: And that's when he has this aha moment about the power of capitalism and actually giving
[Guest]: consumers choice.
[Guest]: So I had the story in the back of my mind.
[Guest]: And I kept looking to see whether there was this aha moment, when Nassima Rao goes to
[Guest]: US or after and I couldn't find it, I was unhappy, I couldn't find it.
[Guest]: But you know, I wanted to be or I had too much of a commitment to my reader to manufacture
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And the answer has to be Amit that on economics, he did not have a change until 1991.
[Guest]: On other things, especially foreign policy, the ardent socialist had softened his position,
[Guest]: but not on economics.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, as foreign minister, he would also have been watching Deng do what
[Amit Varma]: he did in China, and you would have kind of seen those movements and you know, what's
[Amit Varma]: going on there.
[Guest]: So, you know, Pranab Mukherjee once mentioned, he did because I give a quote there also,
[Guest]: where he's amazed at what Deng is doing, transforming the economy, transforming China.
[Guest]: But he notices something others don't, which is Deng is transforming China while pretending
[Guest]: to be a Maoist, like Deng is making China capitalist while pretending to be a communist.
[Guest]: And I have a quote here saying that, you know, where he's where Nassima Rao says that Deng
[Guest]: Joe Ping reminds him of one of those Sanskrit shlokas or Sanskrit quotations, which the
[Guest]: same sentence can be read one way or read the other way, right.
[Guest]: And I mentioned here also that one of Nassima Rao's favorite Telugu poems was this poem,
[Guest]: which if you read it one way, it was the Ramayana, the same text, if you read a different way,
[Guest]: it was the Mahabharata, right.
[Guest]: And Nassima Rao loved that.
[Guest]: And that's frankly, exactly what he did as prime minister that he said, I'm a Nehruvian,
[Guest]: I'm a socialist, India believes in socialism while he's opening up India's economy, right.
[Guest]: That's what he learned from Deng.
[Guest]: So it's not so much the importance of the economy, but the how to bring about change
[Guest]: in a system that is so one way, you cannot have radical changes, you have to pretend
[Guest]: to continuity while bringing more change.
[Guest]: And just to give you an example, after reading this book, you know, a CEO came to me, and
[Guest]: she told me that she had just become CEO.
[Guest]: And her first instinct was to say that the previous CEO is a fool, and I'm going to bring
[Guest]: about changes, and I'm going to make this change that change.
[Guest]: But she said, Look, I read your book, and I realized that if I do that, then all the
[Guest]: people the old CEO has appointed who are still there in the system will resent her, and we'll
[Guest]: we'll push back against her.
[Guest]: So what she had to say was that, oh, the previous CEO was fantastic, all his choices was fantastic
[Guest]: while she brought about changes, which were radically different from the old CEO.
[Guest]: And I said, man, you understood this book much better than I have, because that's exactly
[Guest]: the point of Nassima Rao.
[Guest]: And I can tell you, Amit, any of your listeners listening to this, who work in organizations,
[Guest]: right, realize that, you know, will agree with me that changing the DNA of organizations
[Guest]: are really hard.
[Guest]: And socialism was in the DNA of the Indian state was in the DNA of the Congress Party,
[Guest]: just like communism was in the DNA of the Chinese state.
[Guest]: And the way to do it is the Deng Xiaoping and Nassima Rao way, which is to pretend to
[Guest]: continuity in a system, while simultaneously through your actions bringing about radical
[Amit Varma]: change.
[Amit Varma]: And this is pretty much as profound an insight from politics that can be applied to everything
[Amit Varma]: as say, Doris Keynes Goodwin's team of rivals, right, how Lincoln put his cabinet together,
[Amit Varma]: where instead of just putting his supporters in his cabinet, he got his greatest rivals,
[Amit Varma]: including the guy he defeated in the presidential elections and put them in the cabinet.
[Amit Varma]: And that was one big reason for his success in winning the Civil War.
[Amit Varma]: And that's almost cliched.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, both of these could be LinkedIn posts, in a sense, which are so, you know, Pranam
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee once told Nassima Rao that during this period, he thought Nassima Rao was invaluable
[Amit Varma]: to Indira Gandhi, she could not function without him.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about what he's actually doing in government, like, one gets that when he's
[Amit Varma]: out of power, he's not creating a political fuss, because there are other facets to his
[Amit Varma]: personality.
[Amit Varma]: He's learning Spanish, he's going abroad and buying calculator, he's doing all of these
[Amit Varma]: things.
[Amit Varma]: And the way that he gets to power is often by being inoffensive to everyone in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that this is not someone who threatens me.
[Amit Varma]: So let me give him an important ministry like foreign ministry or so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But when he's actually in power, when he's in that position, one in terms of governance
[Amit Varma]: in the ministry itself, what is his approach and what is the kind of work that he is doing?
[Amit Varma]: And how do you rate him as a minister?
[Amit Varma]: And two, in a political sense, as Indira Gandhi's aid, what's his role there?
[Amit Varma]: And what role is he playing for her?
[Guest]: So I think that as in government, Nassima Rao was good at three different things.
[Guest]: Firstly, he was just a consummate draftsman.
[Guest]: So I would say that, you know, from the 1970s, every piece of paper that would exit the Congress
[Guest]: party would have his fingerprints on it.
[Guest]: So he just knew, you know, in a cabinet meeting, he knew how to, you know, write what the minute
[Guest]: look like, he knew what to write the cabinet agenda.
[Guest]: So, you know, now look, Pranam Mukherjee was good at this, Jayaram Ramesh is very good
[Guest]: at this, right?
[Guest]: So this was a talent that Nassima Rao had that he was a draftsman, right?
[Guest]: The second talent he had is that in any ministry that he took charge of, he quickly understood
[Guest]: the issues because he applied himself, right?
[Guest]: So a lot of ministers think of a ministry as an ego trip, right?
[Guest]: So Nassima Rao didn't think that.
[Guest]: So for example, he had been defence minister and foreign minister and Rajiv Gandhi made
[Guest]: him education minister or HRD minister.
[Guest]: Now, for most people, this is a demotion, but Nassima Rao is not a demotion.
[Guest]: He quickly gets in, he understands the mechanics of the Navodaya school, you know, he knew
[Guest]: all of that.
[Guest]: So I think the second thing that he was very good at was in the ministry, he would very
[Guest]: quickly get to the issues.
[Guest]: And he was a good, he could brief the Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi or Indira Gandhi about
[Guest]: the issues because he actually applied himself to the specifics of the ministry.
[Guest]: When it came to foreign policy, you know, he, you know, he told his son, his grandson,
[Guest]: I think, when Nassima Rao travelled to a country, he first read up about the country, the culture,
[Guest]: the people, the politics.
[Guest]: Can you think of any other foreign minister in India bar Jai Shankar doing that?
[Guest]: Out of the question, right?
[Guest]: Again, when he was defence minister, I mentioned here, he's quickly, you know, getting involved
[Guest]: in the nuclear program, this, that and later on when Arunachalam, who was heading the nuclear
[Guest]: program at that time comes to him, and you know, he says, you please draw out what the
[Guest]: nuclear process looks like, he said, okay, this is where the chain reaction takes place.
[Guest]: So he's getting involved.
[Guest]: And then he's briefing Indira Gandhi and Rajiv Gandhi.
[Guest]: That's a skill.
[Guest]: Ask yourself, even today, how many ministers actually have depth in their department or
[Guest]: their subject expertise, rather than looking at the ministry or being a minister as an
[Guest]: ego trip, which tells them their relative importance in the pecking order, for most
[Guest]: of people, it's in the latter, right?
[Guest]: The third skill Nassima Rao had was that he could balance action and theory very well,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So, for example, and these were skills that he came to as prime minister also, and this
[Guest]: is outside his department.
[Guest]: For example, he told Rajiv Gandhi that, you know, getting involved in Sri Lanka is an
[Guest]: error, right?
[Guest]: Rajiv Gandhi didn't listen to him.
[Guest]: But he said that, right?
[Guest]: On the other hand, he pushed for the Navodaya schooling system, which is residential schools
[Guest]: for poor people, where the teacher actually lives in the place, right?
[Guest]: So that to prevent teacher absenteeism, because the teacher is living in the school, the teacher
[Guest]: is less likely to bunk and Rajiv Gandhi, you know, took, you know, took charge of that
[Guest]: or agreed with that.
[Guest]: So he had this ability, I think all three, right?
[Guest]: He was a good draftsman.
[Guest]: He had subject matter expertise.
[Guest]: So he was as good as the bureaucrat.
[Guest]: To give you an example, Modi today, by all accounts, listens to the secretary in every
[Guest]: department, every ministry rather than listening to the minister.
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao knew as much about foreign politics or foreign policy as the foreign secretary,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I unearthed a document here, which the Indian ambassador to China writes to Narsimha Rao,
[Guest]: About the Chinese situation and Narsimha Rao is writing in the notes on the margins, highly
[Guest]: detailed pushbacks.
[Guest]: I don't know too many ministers who could second guess a foreign secretary or an ambassador,
[Guest]: because an Indian ambassador to a country has subject matter expertise, right?
[Guest]: So I would say Narsimha Rao had all these three.
[Guest]: It's a unique skill, but you know, look, Pranab Mukherjee had these skills, right?
[Guest]: He was invaluable too, right?
[Guest]: What he lacked which Narsimha Rao had is the ability to act and to act decisively when
[Guest]: he became prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: Seeing this, the landscape changes in the sense Indira Gandhi is assassinated and what
[Amit Varma]: you know, the aftermath happens, we've already sort of alluded to the riots and then eventually
[Amit Varma]: Rajiv Gandhi takes hold of the party.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, you also in fact, quote Tacitus, where Tacitus, after whom I think
[Amit Varma]: the term taciturn comes, right?
[Amit Varma]: And Tacitus says, quote, the higher a man's rank, the more eager is hypocrisy and his
[Amit Varma]: looks are more carefully studied, so as to neither betray joy at the decrees of one emperor
[Amit Varma]: nor sorrow at the rise of another, while he mingled delight and lamentations with his
[Amit Varma]: flattery.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Isn't it a wonderful quote?
[Guest]: It's a remarkable quote.
[Guest]: And so opposite, so correct to describe Narsimha Rao when Indira Gandhi died and Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: is rising and he's very, very careful that he knows that he was close to Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: Now he has to become close to Rajiv Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and unlike Pranab Mukherjee, who makes a mess of it, lobbied for the position of
[Amit Varma]: Prime Minister and eventually, and then when he was in exile, just left the party and threw
[Guest]: a tantrum.
[Guest]: I think it was Pratap Mehta who told me that the difference between Narsimha Rao and Arjun
[Guest]: Singh was Narsimha Rao was clever, Arjun Singh was clever by half and Pranab Mukherjee was
[Guest]: clever by half and Narsimha Rao, as the, you know, given the quote that you mentioned like
[Guest]: was being clever.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, sometimes I think the kind of cleverness that you're alluding to is not
[Amit Varma]: just the cleverness to say the right thing, but also to shut up at the right time.
[Unknown]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Which, you know, Narsimha Rao would perhaps had done.
[Guest]: I got to tell you, I, you know, I was just reading this book to prepare for this conversation
[Guest]: because you know, I last read the book six years ago when I had written the book.
[Guest]: And I was just telling myself, I wish I had internalized this year, you know, that I should
[Guest]: keep quiet at key moments.
[Guest]: I just don't do that.
[Guest]: I say what I think.
[Guest]: But Narsimha Rao knew, you know, the importance of silence or when not to say something, when
[Guest]: to step back, when not to die on that hill.
[Guest]: Something I think I should, having reread the book, I think I should learn now.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, I was thinking a little while earlier that Narsimha Rao with his learning
[Amit Varma]: and knowledge and experience would have made such a fantastic guest for this podcast.
[Amit Varma]: But now what you just said, I don't know how much he would have told me and if he even
[Amit Varma]: if he...
[Guest]: So that's problem one.
[Guest]: Problem two is, you know, I give the story about Narsimha Rao meeting Bill Clinton in
[Guest]: 1994.
[Guest]: And Bill Clinton really doesn't like the meeting when Narsimha Rao is, you know, is nervous
[Guest]: and his response to being nervous is to give a long lecture as an academic, long academic
[Guest]: lecture.
[Guest]: He could do that too.
[Guest]: So either he would be silent to your questions, Amit, or he would give long winded, boring
[Guest]: academic answers that would bore your listeners.
[Guest]: I don't know which is worse.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, I would, I would get great masala out of him if he agreed to speak, but he would
[Amit Varma]: have to agree first and now it's a problem because he's been dead for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: So what can one do about that?
[Amit Varma]: But why did you say that you wish you had internalized that quality of knowing when
[Amit Varma]: to shut up?
[Amit Varma]: Are you someone who gets yourself into spots by speaking too much?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I haven't yet got myself into spots.
[Guest]: But you know, I normally if somebody asked me a question, I try to give the straightforward
[Guest]: answer, even if it's politically incorrect, whatever, you know, maybe, you know, God knows,
[Guest]: but you know, maybe it's a Nassim Barraus is a more professionally astute way to go
[Amit Varma]: about it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I hope you don't get cancelled from Ashoka University for something you say
[Unknown]: in future.
[Amit Varma]: So watch your mouth, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Now, we've already kind of discussed the aftermath of the assassination where of the murder when,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the riots happen and he's been told the police can't report to him and you've
[Amit Varma]: described him it as his wireless star and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And so I won't go over that sort of area again.
[Amit Varma]: But once the new cabinet sort of settles down, and now he's made the defense minister, you
[Amit Varma]: know, what's the scene like?
[Amit Varma]: Because what Rajiv Gandhi does is he gets a whole bunch of his cronies, people he's
[Amit Varma]: been to school with many of them at Doon School.
[Amit Varma]: So people like Arun Singh and Satish Sharma and Arun Nehru was there, Mani Shankar Iyer,
[Amit Varma]: all of these people.
[Amit Varma]: So he gets these Lutyens elite as it were, and these are the Lutyens elite I think we
[Amit Varma]: truly should look down upon.
[Amit Varma]: And he gets this Lutyens elite of English speaking elites who have, you know, no sense
[Amit Varma]: of India per se.
[Amit Varma]: And Narsimha Rao is in the cabinet as well.
[Amit Varma]: So what's the deal?
[Amit Varma]: How is he kind of jockeying for position within this bunch of people?
[Amit Varma]: And what do you think he wants at this point, like he's already tried and failed to be nominated
[Amit Varma]: for the presidency when, you know, Indira Gandhi chooses Zehl Singh over him.
[Amit Varma]: What's happening here?
[Guest]: Well, he wants to continue to be in power like all politicians.
[Guest]: I mean, I hope I haven't given your listeners the view that Narsimha Rao is bathed in milk.
[Guest]: He's not, right?
[Guest]: So he's as ambitious as, you know, complexity is both ambitious and unambitious.
[Guest]: But he certainly wants to continue to be in power.
[Guest]: His single focus is to be as close and useful to Rajiv Gandhi as he was to Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: The most important thing is he recognizes what you just said, that he's an outsider
[Guest]: in Team Rajiv, right?
[Guest]: And he has to reinvent himself.
[Guest]: And I have this wonderful story here about how he overhears Rajiv Gandhi making some
[Guest]: allusion to computers.
[Guest]: He's not heard the phrase before.
[Guest]: You know, this is the mid 80s, right?
[Guest]: And Narsimha Rao is in the 60s.
[Guest]: And he asks his son, what is this computer?
[Guest]: Send me a, you know, send me a sample.
[Guest]: And his son sends him a sample from Hyderabad to Delhi of a computer.
[Guest]: It comes by Indian Airlines.
[Guest]: And Narsimha Rao doesn't, you know, you know, hire somebody to teach him, does that a little
[Guest]: bit and as I mentioned, very soon learns COBOL, BASIC and UNIX, right?
[Guest]: And it's just an example of how Narsimha Rao is using his skill at curiosity to refashion
[Guest]: himself and retool himself to be as useful to Rajiv Gandhi as he is to Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: And he successfully so.
[Guest]: He becomes foreign minister again.
[Guest]: For Rajiv Gandhi to give him the education ministry is not actually a demotion from defense,
[Guest]: but he's giving it to him because he feels that Narsimha Rao has something to offer and
[Guest]: something to add to it, right?
[Guest]: And for him, education is a priority sector.
[Guest]: So Narsimha Rao is retooling himself.
[Guest]: But you know, by the time he, Narsimha Rao reaches 1991, he's old, Rajiv Gandhi decides
[Guest]: that his career is over, right?
[Guest]: He tries again to become president in 1987.
[Guest]: But his close friend R Venkatraman, who was the same vintage at him become president himself,
[Guest]: but Narsimha Rao could have become president.
[Guest]: He was well within the realm of becoming president.
[Guest]: But the key thing here is that when Rajiv Gandhi asks him to step down, doesn't give
[Guest]: him a ticket, Narsimha Rao doesn't rebel.
[Guest]: As I mentioned earlier, he accepts with equanimity his fall.
[Guest]: Most politicians will create a ruckus, give a press conference, abuse, Narsimha Rao doesn't
[Guest]: do that, right?
[Guest]: And yet, as I point out, there's a key moment when Narsimha Rao hears that Rajiv Gandhi
[Guest]: has been murdered, when at the time he hears it, he's in shock, a doctor has to come to
[Guest]: kind of settle him down.
[Guest]: But very soon, in just a few hours, he realizes that by virtue of being one of the senior
[Guest]: most leaders of the Congress, who stepped down when the Nehru-Gandhis asked him to do
[Guest]: it, he is now best primed to become prime minister.
[Guest]: And within a few hours, he's, you know, he's, he's, you know, moving to Delhi, maneuvering,
[Guest]: trying to become prime minister.
[Guest]: That's that's amazing political instinct.
[Guest]: And it taught me that Narsimha Rao's key skill was when he realized that the cards he had
[Guest]: been dealt with are not good.
[Guest]: And I'm sure there's a poker analogy, Amit, I just don't know enough poker, he, you know,
[Guest]: he knows he has a bad hand, so he plays it on defense.
[Guest]: And when suddenly the hand turns for him, he ends up with a good hand, he plays aggressively.
[Guest]: Is there an analogy in poker for that?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'd have to think of one, there are various situations in which I mean, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it's common in poker, of course, that a bad hand turns into a good hand, but often it
[Amit Varma]: is not in your control, but you can play even a bad hand in such a way that a better hand
[Amit Varma]: can fold, because, you know, and so I won't go too far with the poker, but certainly what
[Amit Varma]: he the canniness he showed in suggesting ND Tiwari's name, as you point out, it's just
[Amit Varma]: an example of the kind of mind games he's playing, that he is simultaneously by that
[Amit Varma]: signaling that, hey, I am not desperate for this position.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, I'm not a threat to anyone.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, he's putting forward a candidate who he knows is unacceptable.
[Guest]: So they're going to come back to him.
[Guest]: Yeah, I'm going to just read out if you don't mind, but I have the book with me.
[Guest]: The diary entry of Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: This is the day after Rajiv has been murdered, the all the congressmen are around the body
[Guest]: or shards of the body in 10 Janpat pretending to cry while maneuvering to become the next
[Guest]: Prime Minister.
[Guest]: And while Narsimha Rao is there, and just you know, just an advertisement to the reader,
[Guest]: this book is being made into an OTT series directed by Prakash Jha.
[Guest]: And I've requested Mr. Jha that they must have this visual, which is that the dead body
[Guest]: is there and then around them all these congressmen in white wearing the Congress topi are all
[Guest]: pretending to cry, but actually they're doing guspus on who to succeed, right.
[Guest]: And suddenly what happens is that Narsimha Rao writes in his diary that while we and
[Guest]: I'm quoting here, while we were hanging around the dead body in 10 Janpat, Pranab took me
[Guest]: aside and told me that there was genuine agreement on me being elected Congress President.
[Guest]: Rao doesn't say yes, yes, I should become Congress President, because if he does that,
[Guest]: Pranab will tell everybody look Narsimha Rao wants to become Congress President and then
[Guest]: everybody would gun for him.
[Guest]: So Narsimha Rao, this is what Narsimha Rao says, I knew that Pranab's report was too
[Guest]: good to be true, either he was himself a dupe or he was party to some kind of design and
[Guest]: was trying to lull me.
[Guest]: He had done this role many times in those crucial years of Indiraji, I did not want
[Guest]: to react.
[Guest]: I mentioned about my health and said I was I feel a bit diffident, Narsimha Rao is pretending
[Guest]: to Pranab.
[Guest]: I suggested NDT who is ND Tiwari instead, taking care to add that I was not refusing
[Guest]: yet it would be good if he came up after a consensus.
[Guest]: I also knew that ND Tiwari would be unacceptable as or more so than myself in the scheme of
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: This paragraph tells me everything you want to know about Narsimha Rao maneuvering.
[Guest]: Just imagine that visual Pranab coming and whispering and look this is written that night,
[Guest]: it's his diary.
[Guest]: So that this is happening in the day and in the night Narsimha Rao is writing this and
[Guest]: it just told me and it also told me how lucky I was as a biographer to get access to the
[Guest]: innermost thoughts of Narsimha Rao in the day that he does it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah that's incredible and I can think of a lesser man either enthusiastically saying
[Amit Varma]: yes yes or even putting his arm around Pranab's shoulder and saying that if I become PM I'll
[Guest]: make you FM which would have been as big a disaster for India.
[Guest]: Disaster because imagine what Pranab would have done, he would have gone and told Sonia
[Guest]: Gandhi that look Narsimha Rao wants to be Prime Minister and immediately they would
[Amit Varma]: have killed him.
[Amit Varma]: So this is beautiful.
[Amit Varma]: Now before we get to the 1991 phase when he takes over as PM, a final question I want
[Amit Varma]: to ask you about the earlier period which comes from something really interesting where
[Amit Varma]: you point out that there were once a set of papers you know with the heading human resource
[Amit Varma]: development and there were a bunch of papers and and that happened to have an excerpt that
[Amit Varma]: happened to have something that Rao had handwritten himself and that included, I'll read this
[Amit Varma]: bit out, quote with human resource development as a heading it contained an excerpt from
[Amit Varma]: an author Rao enjoyed, Antoine de Saint-Exupry, I hope I'm pronouncing that right and the
[Amit Varma]: excerpt is this is the Saint-Exupry's words, quote a rock pile ceases to be a rock
[Amit Varma]: pile the moment a single man contemplates it bearing within him the image of a cathedral,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Incredible quote right and now your words continue, below this Rao had written woman
[Amit Varma]: and child development, health, youth affairs, sports, culture, labor, question mark and
[Amit Varma]: you continue, the note was returned to Rao and he slipped it into the pocket of his kurta
[Amit Varma]: later that morning he went to see the Prime Minister which is Rajiv Gandhi, he told Rajiv
[Amit Varma]: stop quote and now Rao's words we see a rock pile of disorganized underutilized human resources
[Amit Varma]: you see a cathedral, you see a cathedral, we can fashion it but we need to go beyond
[Amit Varma]: just the ministry of education, stop quote and now you continue Rao persuaded Rajiv to
[Amit Varma]: integrate the departments of culture, youth affairs, sports, women and child development
[Amit Varma]: and later health with education into the new HRD ministry, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Like first of all I just love this image of somebody sees a rock pile and somebody sees
[Amit Varma]: a cathedral, a stunning image and also it seems to me that all of these you know culture,
[Amit Varma]: youth affairs, sports, women and child development are amenable to scaling right.
[Amit Varma]: You make a small difference here, it reverberates into something much bigger, it's not static,
[Amit Varma]: it scales massively and that's exactly the thing about liberalization as well that economic
[Amit Varma]: freedom also scales in a similar way where the state is playing an enabling part as it
[Amit Varma]: does in all of these subjects you know and this struck me as really interesting and kind
[Amit Varma]: of wise from Rao in getting you know I mean I don't know if he chose this ministry or
[Amit Varma]: asked for it or whatever but he was clearly reveling in it but in these specific subjects
[Amit Varma]: and labor was left out because it had more to do with taking care of the interests of
[Amit Varma]: labor currently and all of that not so scalable but unless you change the labor laws which
[Amit Varma]: of course hurt labor more than they help them but that's a different story but all of these
[Amit Varma]: are extremely scalable and liberalization in the end also proves to be that.
[Amit Varma]: So does this sort of indicate that his mindset is broader and thinking at you know a different
[Amit Varma]: kind of level than the typical politician who when in put in charge of a ministry may
[Amit Varma]: have an engineering mindset that let us tinker, we will fix this, we will fix that, we will
[Amit Varma]: fix this but is he perhaps showing a more of an enabling mindset here which also might
[Amit Varma]: explain why he was more open to Naresh Chandra's note as cabinet secretary so a few years later.
[Guest]: That's a good question Amit. I would say that when it came to welfare schemes you're absolutely
[Guest]: right that he had an enabling mindset, he had a visionary mindset, he could think out
[Guest]: of the box. That's what we see you know throughout and look he knew what he was talking about.
[Guest]: He was education minister and health minister in Andhra Pradesh, he was education minister
[Guest]: in Delhi so he knew how the state education function, how the center education function
[Guest]: and he had imagination to say let's transform and he found in Rajiv Gandhi a willing prime
[Guest]: minister because Rajiv was passionate about this too right. I don't see this on in economics,
[Guest]: I just don't see it. He was a same old stodgy protectionist right and you know again I've
[Guest]: thought about this many many times that is there some because there's so much from his
[Guest]: life that tells you about how he was prime minister in other ways like how he managed
[Guest]: the politics of reform, how he managed welfare schemes, foreign policy. There isn't anything
[Guest]: about economics you know and as a biographer I have to go with the evidence and all evidence
[Guest]: points to the fact that he was a mild protectionist on economics. He hadn't really thought about
[Guest]: it but when Naresh Chandra shows him that note he wakes up. He says India has to change
[Guest]: and once he decides to do that he moves with remarkable alacrity.
[Amit Varma]: So you know I'll I won't discuss any more of that bit about how he becomes prime minister
[Amit Varma]: but I recommend everyone read it because it's a racy read and these are going to be the
[Amit Varma]: best couple of episodes in the most fascinating episodes in the OTT. You know the way he maneuvers
[Amit Varma]: himself to the Congress presidency, the farmhouse meeting with Shankar Dayal Sharma, the way
[Amit Varma]: Sharath Pawar tries to get in the way and become the prime minister saying that no on
[Amit Varma]: principle the party president cannot be leader of the Lok Sabha and bla bla bla. Let's talk
[Amit Varma]: about actually coming to power and he comes to power and his cabinet secretary Naresh
[Amit Varma]: Chandra gives him this note and at this moment he's effectively still a man alone in the
[Amit Varma]: cabinet. He hasn't chosen the people around him. He certainly hasn't chosen the finance
[Amit Varma]: minister and all of these choices that he makes will now be influenced by this note.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the note. What was the problem and what did the note say?
[Guest]: So just to give you a background before I answer that question. Since the early 1980s
[Guest]: there was a push within the Indian system to liberalize the economy in terms of ideas.
[Guest]: So there was an LK Jha report, there was an Abid Hussain report, Montek Singh had, Alu
[Guest]: Walia had authored a famous M document, you know, and Rakesh Mohan had also authored a
[Guest]: new industrial policy. What were all these pushing back against? All these were pushing
[Guest]: back against what we call the License Quota Permit Raj. What was this License Quota Permit
[Guest]: Raj? It had three components. First was that it closed off large sections of the Indian
[Guest]: economy to private entrepreneurs. Only the public sector could enter and where, for example,
[Guest]: making watches, only HMT could do it and HMT was used to making heavy tools, Hindustan
[Guest]: machine tools, heavy industry. So you ended up with terrible HMT watches that people still
[Guest]: wore because they didn't have any options. And you had then a few sectors where the government,
[Guest]: their private sector could participate, but they needed all kinds of licenses. So that
[Guest]: was the first thing the government did. The second thing as part of the License Quota
[Guest]: Permit Raj was that the size of private companies was stymied by making capital difficult for
[Guest]: them because of bank nationalization, right, by the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
[Guest]: Act, for example. So many ways in which the size of private businesses was stymied, they
[Guest]: couldn't actually access the capital markets without permission from the what was called
[Guest]: a CCI at that time. The third element was you were sealing off India from the world.
[Guest]: So heavy tariffs when it, entry barriers when it came to foreign goods, heavy restrictions
[Guest]: on foreign capital entering India, a rupee that was artificially valued, so it made exports
[Guest]: very difficult, etc, etc, etc, right. Since the 80s, many bureaucrats were making arguments
[Guest]: that these three pillars had to be dismantled, right. The blueprint that Nassim Harao got
[Guest]: was essentially a dismantling of these three wings, right, to make most of the Indian economy
[Guest]: accessible to the private sector to invest, right, to reduce restrictions on the growth
[Guest]: of the private sector, and three, to allow foreign capital and goods to enter India,
[Guest]: right. This was what the blueprint talked about. The blueprint also said that unless
[Guest]: you do it, the Indian foreign exchange was so low that we would default on an IMF loan,
[Guest]: we didn't have enough money. I mention in the book reasons, short term reasons for why
[Guest]: the Indian economy was suffering, why we lacked foreign capital. Listeners only have to look
[Guest]: to Sri Lanka today to see that it was very, very similar situation. Now, hopefully Sri
[Guest]: Lanka learns from Nassim Harao and uses this for long term reforms of the economy. Hopefully
[Guest]: they do that. Nassim Harao was able to do that. But I just want to give you that this
[Guest]: is the background to that particular document.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, it's a great background. And, you know, and just speaking of what Indira did,
[Amit Varma]: like people castigate her for the emergency and all that, which she should be castigated
[Amit Varma]: for. But for me, her economic policies were as disastrous, if not more, I think they kept
[Amit Varma]: millions of Indians in poverty for decades longer than they should have. They were a
[Amit Varma]: crime on humanity. And people don't often think of economics as such a dry subject,
[Amit Varma]: you know, License Raj, this, that. But the point is, you have real consequences on real
[Amit Varma]: human beings. That's, you know, exactly what happened with her. But you know, that rant
[Amit Varma]: aside, it's also...
[Guest]: Just to add to your rant, people unfairly criticize Nehru. He had a mild antipathy towards
[Guest]: the private sector. But look, he was obsessed with growth. And when he looked around himself
[Guest]: in the 40s, the country that was able to grow was the Soviet Union. It was the growth model,
[Guest]: just like China is today. And so he adopted fire plans, etc, etc. Is Indira Gandhi who
[Guest]: turned this mild antipathy towards the private sector into complete antipathy and instead
[Guest]: of favoring growth, she favored her political survival. So I would put the blame squarely
[Amit Varma]: on Indira Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: I would put it squarely on her as well. And what makes her particularly evil, and I use
[Amit Varma]: that word advisedly, is that she didn't even believe that this was the right way for India
[Amit Varma]: to go. It was just a matter of political positioning. She wanted to position herself as different
[Amit Varma]: from the coterie than in charge of the Congress. And therefore, this massive leftward tilt
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, slogans like Gareebi Hatao, when what she was actually doing was perpetuating
[Amit Varma]: Gareebi. And there's even an amusing anecdote in your book where you talk about how PV Narasimha
[Amit Varma]: Rao at a conference of the Andhra Pradesh backward classes declares, quote, we will
[Amit Varma]: not tolerate capitalists, even if he is a Harijan, stop quote, you know, similar to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Nehru's, when Nehru told JRD Tata that do not speak to me of profit, it is a
[Amit Varma]: dirty word. Stop, quote, I didn't know that. Yeah, that's a pretty kind of famous. So he
[Amit Varma]: also had not just a slight distrust, but a fair antipathy. But you're right that, you
[Guest]: know, he was obsessed with growth. You have to give him that. His policies, much as they
[Amit Varma]: were wrong, and they hurt us and didn't allow us to go the East Asian miracle way, at least
[Amit Varma]: you can understand where they came from. He was well intentioned, he wanted the best.
[Guest]: I would say more, you know, he set the template for East Asian growth, because you look in
[Guest]: the 50s, East Asia was not growing. What Nehru was able to do was move an economy that was
[Guest]: growing negatively to a 3% growth rate. See, we call it Hindu rate of growth. That's the
[Guest]: wrong phrase. But that rate of growth was much higher than what the British left India
[Guest]: with. And so frankly, by 19 mid 1960s, the stage was set perfectly for Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: to do what the East Asia was doing at that point. East Asian growth began in the 60s.
[Guest]: That was the Indira Gandhi period. And you know, Nehru had provided more of a base than
[Guest]: say, Thailand or Malaysia or Indonesia had at that point. So it was Indira Gandhi who
[Amit Varma]: completely blew it up.
[Amit Varma]: Indira Gandhi completely blew it up in multiple ways. And the interesting thing is that today
[Amit Varma]: people try to do a little rewriting of history and say that, oh, Rajiv Gandhi really started
[Amit Varma]: the reforms and all of that. But as you sort of show in your book, that initially there
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, the talk of reforms did come from policy wonks and bureaucrats and so on
[Amit Varma]: within his administration, but he showed absolutely no will from it, turned away from it.
[Guest]: Well, just pushing back a little bit, he initially tried. So, you know, in 1985, he gives a speech
[Guest]: against power brokers in the Congress. You know, he expands what was called the Open
[Guest]: General License. So more and more sectors became available in the Indian economy for
[Guest]: the Indian private sector to invest. He was the most pro-American Prime Minister since
[Guest]: then. So in that sense, his instincts to liberalize what I would say more than Narasimha Rao.
[Guest]: What he lacked, and this is the key argument of the book, is the politics of reform. He
[Guest]: just didn't know how to do it. So from 1986-87, when he had strong headwinds, Bofors, the
[Guest]: growth of Hindu nationalism and the BJP, Salman Rushdie's satanic verses being banned, he
[Guest]: completely lost balance, you know. And that's the point of the book, which is that, look,
[Guest]: the ideas were there in the 80s. Four Prime Ministers, including Rajiv Gandhi, had the
[Guest]: ideas, right? Prime Ministers such as VP Singh, Chandrashekhar, especially Chandrashekhar
[Guest]: and even Rajiv Gandhi even had the instincts to liberalize. If you remember, VP Singh was
[Guest]: the liberalizing finance minister of Rajiv Gandhi, right? What they lacked is the political
[Guest]: ability to remain in power and push through reforms. That's the core ingredient that Narasimha
[Guest]: Rao book brings. And I want to repeat this, that liberalization in India is not about
[Guest]: good ideas. Good ideas are well known in India, right? It's not even about political will.
[Guest]: It's about political ability, right? That's the key ingredient, the political instincts
[Guest]: or the political will to reform existed with Rajiv Gandhi initially, but then he just couldn't
[Guest]: manage the headwinds of actually running government and he retreated. Narasimha Rao was able to
[Guest]: manage parliament, manage party, manage Sonia Gandhi and bring about change. That's the
[Amit Varma]: central point of the book. When I think of Rajiv Gandhi as CM is just someone who is
[Amit Varma]: bumbling through governance, who has no core convictions. For example, you use a fantastic
[Amit Varma]: phrase, comparative communalism, right? In the context of first he does Shabano, then he
[Amit Varma]: overcompensates by opening the gates of the Babri Masjid, then he overcompensates to that by,
[Amit Varma]: you know, with the satanic versus ban. We were the first country in the world to ban that book
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth. So he's just bumbling from one thing to the other. You could say,
[Amit Varma]: you know, to go back to our thick and thin thing, he has no thick convictions. It's all thin
[Amit Varma]: convictions. He's just following sort of the winds of the moment. Or do you feel that he had
[Guest]: thick convictions of any sort? I think he had the, you know, I would be favorable to say he had a
[Guest]: thick conviction to liberalize, but he simply didn't have the chops to see it through. And when
[Guest]: that happened, when he had pushback, it's not that he lacked conviction, he lacked courage.
[Guest]: And there's a slight difference between the two, right? He had the beliefs were intact,
[Guest]: you know, but he just lacked, you know, when there was pushback, he just lacked the ability
[Guest]: to navigate that. He was a child. That's, you know, children have thick convictions, right?
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, I think they are thin, but intense.
[Guest]: I mean, because the way you describe thin was that they came from other people, you know,
[Guest]: I felt that again, who knows, I haven't gone to Rajiv's mind and certainly the book is not on
[Guest]: Rajiv, but I felt that his, you know, he was sincere and his belief in transforming India was
[Guest]: deeply held. But that's not all you need in politics. That's the point I make again and again,
[Guest]: right? That thick conviction needs ability to actually transform that on the ground, right?
[Guest]: I may deeply, deeply believe that I want to end poverty, right? But unless I have the chops and
[Guest]: the mechanisms to do it, that deeply held thick conviction matters for not, right?
[Amit Varma]: And not just that, you may believe you want to end poverty and you may even have the political
[Amit Varma]: chops to do whatever it takes, but you may have a misunderstanding of the problem to begin with.
[Guest]: I don't think Rajiv had a misunderstanding.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'm not saying he did.
[Guest]: But I think he had a correct understanding.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just pointing out that these are all the qualities that would go into change that
[Amit Varma]: one, you have to have the conviction, two, you have to have the understanding of what requires
[Amit Varma]: to be done and three, you would need the political chops to kind of pull it off.
[Amit Varma]: So moving away from Rajiv, because like you said, your book isn't about Rajiv and why we
[Guest]: even talking about him.
[Guest]: But you know, for me, the tragedy of Rajiv was even the greater,
[Guest]: you know, just to end that, which is here's a man who had convictions, who had a mandate.
[Guest]: I mean, he had the largest mandate, I think 404 or 405 seats in parliament,
[Guest]: much more than Narendra Modi, almost, you know, more than 100 more than Narendra Modi, right?
[Guest]: So imagine, right?
[Guest]: Imagine somebody who is 25% stronger than Narendra Modi is at the moment, right?
[Guest]: Or even 30% stronger.
[Guest]: Just imagine what that looks like.
[Guest]: And still he messed it up, right?
[Amit Varma]: It's unforgivable, really.
[Amit Varma]: It's unforgivable.
[Amit Varma]: Let's sort of now talk about, you know, he sees Red Note from Narendra and there is a
[Guest]: body of work which has gone on, Rakesh Mohan, like you said, in 1988.
[Guest]: There's a decade of work that has gone on that precedes that note.
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh played a key part in that preceding decade too.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And so what happens now?
[Amit Varma]: At this point, he sees the note, one, which is something that impressed me a lot is that
[Amit Varma]: you said he grasped the enormity of the crisis immediately.
[Amit Varma]: And that by itself is impressive, because, you know, a lot of politicians, when you're
[Amit Varma]: sort of told something about the economy, and it's an abstract subject, and you don't
[Amit Varma]: have prior understanding of it, that in any way can be called deep, like he had of so
[Amit Varma]: many other subjects, you know, for him to just figure out that this is a big deal, and
[Amit Varma]: I need to do something.
[Amit Varma]: And this has to be the sole focus, because it seems to me that after that, from the events
[Amit Varma]: that you describe, everything that he does politically, seems to go towards solving the
[Amit Varma]: problem, right down to choosing the finance minister, whereas you said Pranab Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: supported his rise to the Congress presidency and the prime ministership.
[Amit Varma]: And Pranab had been finance minister under Indira as well, would have been a natural
[Amit Varma]: choice for him.
[Amit Varma]: But he didn't pick Pranab because he thought that I have to solve this problem.
[Amit Varma]: And that is the wrong man for this problem.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how things start unfolding now and how he comes to his choice
[Guest]: of finance minister and so on.
[Guest]: So Naseem Maharaj understands very clearly that these three pillars of the license permit
[Guest]: quota raj has to be dismantled full stop, right.
[Guest]: So what does he do?
[Guest]: Firstly, he realizes that the key element is the first aspect, right, first and second
[Guest]: aspects, which is that you have to reduce restrictions on domestic entrepreneurs, what
[Guest]: we call internal liberalization.
[Guest]: Step two is external liberalization, which is you have to allow foreign capital and foreign
[Guest]: services and goods to enter India.
[Guest]: But the first step is industrial de-licensing.
[Guest]: So he keeps the industry ministry for himself, people forget this, right, that's a very key
[Guest]: element, right.
[Guest]: Second is he appoints a principal secretary who is a key bureaucrat for every prime minister
[Guest]: who was a former industry secretary, Amarnath Verma, well known liberalizer, right.
[Guest]: Third is he tells PC Alexander who's helping him at that time that look, I need a finance
[Guest]: minister who is open to the world, right, who is able to assist with external liberalization
[Guest]: and there are two names given there.
[Guest]: The first name IG Patel, who is the head of the London School of Economics at that time
[Guest]: says no.
[Guest]: The second name is Manmohan Singh.
[Guest]: So Manmohan Singh says yes, and he becomes the finance minister.
[Guest]: And look, Manmohan Singh has many, many skills that Narsimha Rao who already knows him appreciates.
[Guest]: One is Manmohan Singh is incorruptible, right, with an ethics of a different order from most
[Guest]: people in politics and bureaucracy.
[Guest]: And this is important because Narsimha Rao has an instinct even then, that liberalization
[Guest]: will give rise to allegations of corruption.
[Guest]: And so as the economy is opening up to the private sector, it's very important for to
[Guest]: have a finance minister who's insulated from the shenanigans of the private sector, right,
[Guest]: you don't want to have somebody who's friends with Dhirubhai Ambani, friends with the Tata's,
[Guest]: friends with the Birla's and Manmohan Singh is that guy, right.
[Guest]: Second is that while Manmohan Singh has also had multiple views on liberalization over
[Guest]: the years, he's much more of a conviction liberalizer than Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: And third is that Manmohan Singh has held every single position of economic policy in
[Guest]: the Indian government.
[Guest]: I mean, there are five positions of economic policy in the Indian government finance secretary,
[Guest]: finance minister, deputy chairman planning commission, chief economic advisor of India
[Guest]: and RBI governor, Manmohan Singh has had all of them until he becomes finance minister,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So, he knew every inch of the economic levers, he knew how to while the political cover would
[Guest]: be given by Narsimha Rao, actually implementing it on the ground would be the person, you
[Guest]: know, would be Manmohan Singh and Manmohan Singh was ripe for the idea.
[Guest]: So his incorruptibility, you know, and his ability to understand every inch of economic
[Guest]: policy in India was very important to Narsimha Rao, that's why he was selected, right.
[Guest]: He also had other liberalizers, for example, he had P Chidambaram as Minister of Commerce,
[Guest]: he had Montek Singh Ahluwalia playing a key role.
[Guest]: So he surrounded himself with advisors.
[Guest]: And what I find noteworthy in this Amit is that Manmohan Singh, I mean, Narsimha Rao
[Guest]: wasn't insecure that he knew nothing about economics, he understood that a job needed
[Guest]: to be done.
[Guest]: And he said, who are the best people for the job, he and Manmohan Singh didn't have a personal
[Guest]: equation or personal chemistry that was not relevant to Narsimha Rao.
[Guest]: And this goes back to his childhood that here's a man who's used to being lonely, who's not
[Guest]: used, you know, who's not looking for chamchas, cronies, you know, who will mouth what the
[Guest]: master wants.
[Guest]: He said, I want the best people for the job to be able to do what the job takes.
[Guest]: I think that's a remarkable quality.
[Amit Varma]: There's an anecdote that also is interesting in this context, like we are recording this
[Amit Varma]: on the day that episode 281 released, this episode will be 283.
[Amit Varma]: And 282, which you haven't heard yet, but is the episode that releases before yours
[Amit Varma]: is with Naushad Forbes.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, wow.
[Amit Varma]: And Naushad told me that in that episode, he speaks about how he was at a meeting that
[Amit Varma]: Manmohan Singh had convened of the top industrialists to meet the top industrialists so the finance
[Amit Varma]: minister can kind of talk to them.
[Amit Varma]: So he went to that meeting, and I think he was positioned between Ambani and Tata.
[Amit Varma]: So all the photographs the next day had Naushad Forbes in the middle because he was sitting
[Amit Varma]: between those two guys.
[Amit Varma]: And Naushad gave his usual outspoken views on the importance of liberalization and all
[Amit Varma]: of that at that point.
[Amit Varma]: And after the meeting ended, you know, when Manmohan Singh was shaking all the hands individually
[Amit Varma]: one by one, he told Naushad that, you know, what you said in this meeting, please say
[Amit Varma]: it outside and please say it again and again, and please say it loud, you know, and just
[Amit Varma]: sort of indicating again, what you said about the conviction.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, you've laid out the different kind of obstacles that now existed over here.
[Amit Varma]: One, the Congress has a minority in Parliament.
[Amit Varma]: Two, there is a Bombay Club, which is basically your existing bunch of big industrialists
[Amit Varma]: who have benefited from the License Raj and who don't want competition coming from outside.
[Amit Varma]: You know, underscoring the point I keep making, that what big business wants is not free markets.
[Amit Varma]: It's never that.
[Amit Varma]: They want to hold on to their position.
[Amit Varma]: So market friendly and business friendly are entirely different terms.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: What people like us should aim for is market friendly, because that's where common people
[Amit Varma]: like you and me benefit.
[Amit Varma]: And the third was the legacy of the party itself, that this was a party that had built
[Amit Varma]: this edifice, part of which, you know, Narasimha Rao and Manmohan Singh were now going to start
[Amit Varma]: tearing down.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this lovely sort of passage you have, which I'm going to read out, which describes
[Amit Varma]: what Rao's strategy was towards dismantling the Congress legacy.
[Amit Varma]: And before this, one quick note of context that, you know, the Congress manifesto before
[Amit Varma]: this had nothing about liberalization.
[Amit Varma]: It was completely protectionist and it was a standard, the same old, same old.
[Amit Varma]: And your Para reads, quote, that afternoon Rao convened a meeting of CWC at his house.
[Amit Varma]: He began by saying that all the new policy did was to reverse Indira Gandhi's sharp leftward
[Amit Varma]: tilt in 1969 and take the country back to the more flexible 1956 policy resolution of
[Amit Varma]: Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: The Congress, Rao added, continued to believe in the commanding heights of the public sector.
[Amit Varma]: Having played one Nehru-Gandhi against another, Rao now let his finance minister speak, learning
[Amit Varma]: from his political master, Manmohan invoked the 1991 manifesto to show that within it
[Amit Varma]: lay the seeds of the new industrial policy.
[Amit Varma]: This was far from the truth.
[Amit Varma]: But as Manmohan Singh came out of the meeting, Arjun Singh told him, quote, Dr. Singh, you
[Amit Varma]: have read the manifesto more carefully than we have, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this just speaks to sort of so much sagacity to realize that what they are proposing is
[Amit Varma]: so incredibly radical.
[Amit Varma]: But everything came down to how do you frame it by framing it as a return to Nehru, which
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't by framing it as a continuation of the promises made in the manifesto, which
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't.
[Amit Varma]: They kind of managed to win the game.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about these two games, the internal game within the Congress party to win everybody
[Amit Varma]: over and then the external game because they are still a minority party in parliament.
[Guest]: So tell me a bit about these.
[Guest]: So the internal story is quite fascinating because the party of Nehru and the party of
[Guest]: Indira Gandhi saw liberalization as going against the core DNA of the Congress.
[Guest]: So that was the core issue here.
[Guest]: The way he went about it, I mentioned here, which is that every single liberalization
[Guest]: document was presaged with homilies to Nehru, to Indira Gandhi, to Rajiv especially, because
[Guest]: Narsimha Rao's crafty approach, especially when it came to Sonia Gandhi was to say that
[Guest]: all that he's doing is what Rajiv Gandhi would have done had he not been cruelly interrupted.
[Guest]: That was the kind of the argument, right.
[Guest]: He also unleashed the Intelligence Bureau on the Congress.
[Guest]: I have here, I'm quite proud of it, an Intelligence Bureau document showing who are the different
[Guest]: congressmen and congresswomen and what are their views when it comes to liberalization
[Guest]: and how you should deal with them.
[Guest]: You know, so it's an actual Intelligence Bureau report.
[Guest]: So Narsimha Rao, you know, the agencies that Modi unleashes, he's hardly the first person
[Guest]: to unleash them, right.
[Guest]: The Intelligence Bureau was unleashed by Narsimha Rao far, far earlier than that.
[Guest]: When dealing with the parliament outside, Narsimha Rao survived three no confidence
[Guest]: motions, one confidence motion, and I think one vote of thanks motion.
[Guest]: He did it by ruthlessly splitting the, he always needed 20 or 30 votes to win because
[Guest]: it was a minority in parliament and he did it by, let me put it bluntly by corruption,
[Guest]: right, and other allurements by splitting smaller parties and independent parties and
[Guest]: getting them to vote for the Congress.
[Guest]: But that's not all he did.
[Guest]: So for example, after the Babri Masjid demolition, when there was a no confidence motion against
[Guest]: the Congress, Narsimha Rao went and told the left, look, you should stand with me because
[Guest]: this is a fight about secularism.
[Guest]: So don't talk about liberalization, let's focus on secularism and, you know, he won
[Guest]: that handily.
[Guest]: I think it was 300 to 100 or something like that.
[Guest]: He won that no confidence motion.
[Guest]: So that's the second thing he employed in parliament, which is to at key moments to
[Guest]: basically tell the left that, look, let's not talk about liberalization.
[Guest]: This is a fight to death against secularism.
[Guest]: In that battle, we are on the same side against the BJP, right.
[Guest]: He also reached out to many members, whether it was Jaswant Singh in the BJP, Vajpayee
[Guest]: who was a good friend of his, Chandrashekhar, VP Singh.
[Guest]: So he was constantly trying to engage with other politicians in other political parties.
[Guest]: I think that was another skill he had.
[Guest]: But you know, it's hard to answer this at a meta level Amit because really the way he
[Guest]: managed the party and the way he managed Sonia Gandhi and the way he managed parliament is
[Guest]: day to day kabaddi.
[Guest]: It's not some meta question, day to day he's maneuvering to get, you know.
[Guest]: So really, in some sense, Naseem Arao is, you know, they say you're living hand to mouth.
[Guest]: He's living confidence motion from to no confidence motion.
[Guest]: Every day he's worried that somebody would bring a no confidence motion and the government
[Guest]: would fall.
[Guest]: And look at this, his temporal circumstances, the two governments before him, both minority
[Guest]: governments collapse within a year, right.
[Guest]: The three governments after him, also minority governments collapse nearly within a year,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So he alone was able to last five years, and I think that is incredible.
[Guest]: And that's, again and again, I want to emphasize that unless you know that story, liberalization
[Guest]: doesn't happen, right?
[Guest]: Unless you know how power is, is accumulated, power is stabilized, and then power is expended
[Guest]: for liberalization.
[Guest]: Just understanding the economic policy is neither here nor there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, in a sense, this is a very good companion episode and a companion book to the earlier
[Amit Varma]: episode I done with Shruti and Ajay on the importance of our 91 reforms, what a big deal
[Amit Varma]: they sort of were for India.
[Amit Varma]: And you also have a chapter on what you kind of call the middle overs, right?
[Amit Varma]: Now, initially, you can say that, okay, there was a crisis, they had to do something, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the IMF demanded some reforms as well.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that and okay, so these reforms happen initially.
[Amit Varma]: But these guys kept the game going further than that.
[Amit Varma]: They didn't just stop, they continued with, you know, one reform at a time continued kind
[Amit Varma]: of moving through, though, I feel that as the years went on, the momentum got slower
[Amit Varma]: and slower.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess political imperatives play a part in that as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, that period, which may be missed out by many people
[Amit Varma]: may
[Guest]: A lot of people miss it out, because they assume that liberalization in India happened
[Guest]: because of IMF pressure.
[Guest]: And IMF pressure was when India had a crisis, which is in 91-92, right?
[Guest]: So the entire focus is on that, for example, Jairam Ramesh has written an excellent book
[Guest]: called Back from the Brink, which focuses exclusively on this period, right?
[Guest]: But the reality is that even after the crisis ended, which is in 1992, when India has stable
[Guest]: foreign currency, foreign exchange, even after that, so many reforms were planned, like to
[Guest]: give you an example, the single biggest reform that touches us today is telecom reform, right?
[Guest]: And you know, mobile telephony, that reform happened in 1994-1995, much after the crisis
[Guest]: has ended.
[Guest]: Opening licenses for new banks, HDFC, ICICI, a key ingredient in, you know, allowing credit
[Guest]: to reach entrepreneurs in India today happened much after that crisis ended, right?
[Guest]: Opening up the airline sector to private airlines, Jet, Damania, East West, some of you may remember
[Guest]: these names happened after the crisis ended, and I could go on and on.
[Guest]: So many, you know, reforms happened.
[Guest]: Look, I'm also a critic.
[Guest]: I also point out that there were many reforms that Nassim Rao didn't do in agriculture,
[Guest]: for example, on the labor markets, for example, Nassim Rao didn't touch that at all, right?
[Guest]: On education and health, you know, while his instincts were right, he didn't go as far
[Guest]: as the UPA government and the today's Modi government have done, right?
[Guest]: So you know, the policies were in the right direction, but they weren't as carefully crafted.
[Guest]: And frankly, they didn't have the use of technology that you have today.
[Guest]: That was something he simply didn't have.
[Guest]: But so many reforms happened after that.
[Guest]: And the point of that chapter, Amit, was to push against this view that it was the IMF
[Guest]: who did it and India only reforms under crisis.
[Guest]: There was no crisis in those three years, right?
[Guest]: And yet so many changes, so many reforms happened.
[Guest]: It was because both Manmohan Singh and Nassim Rao were conviction reformers.
[Amit Varma]: I'll leave it to my listeners to actually go read your excellent book and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: go into the weeds of all of this.
[Amit Varma]: It's a fascinating story.
[Amit Varma]: And I can understand why, like, I think Prakash Jha made a very smart choice, this is going
[Amit Varma]: to be a big hit.
[Amit Varma]: But so in the 20 minutes or so that we have left before you have to go, some quick questions
[Amit Varma]: on areas that we can't really leave untouched.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is the demolition of the Babri Masjid, where it is common today to, you know,
[Amit Varma]: to blame Nassim Rao for that.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of it, of course, comes from the Congress desire to disown him and wipe out
[Amit Varma]: his legacy.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll talk about that as well.
[Amit Varma]: Because we can't not talk about that.
[Amit Varma]: But the sort of common canard spread is that he allowed the Babri Masjid demolition willingly.
[Amit Varma]: And I think Sonia Gandhi has even said that, I think Rahul Gandhi has said that if Rajiv
[Guest]: was alive, it would never have happened.
[Guest]: If a Nehru Gandhi was in power, the Babri Masjid, well, so I've answered this question
[Guest]: many times.
[Guest]: So let me put it in this manner, which is, in India, the police come under the state.
[Guest]: In June 1991, the state government of UP, where Babri Masjid is located, was won by
[Guest]: Kalyan Singh of the BJP.
[Guest]: He contested on the plank of demolishing the Babri Masjid and he won the election.
[Guest]: He is a duly elected chief minister.
[Guest]: The BJP enjoys a majority government in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
[Guest]: They are in charge of protecting the Babri Masjid because the police, state police have
[Guest]: to do it.
[Guest]: This is a conundrum.
[Guest]: So anyone who says that the Babri Masjid has to be protected, really you have to go back
[Guest]: not to December 92, but to June 91 to say that a party has come to power in UP, which
[Guest]: has the constitutional obligation to protect the Babri Masjid, yet its political obligation
[Guest]: is to destroy the Babri Masjid.
[Guest]: Should you dismiss that government?
[Guest]: I would like your listeners to answer that question.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What do you think, Amit?
[Guest]: Can you dismiss a government?
[Amit Varma]: I don't think you can dismiss a government.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with you.
[Guest]: It's a conundrum.
[Guest]: You can't.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you've been voted in to do something unconstitutional, you punish them after the
[Guest]: act.
[Guest]: You can't dismiss them preemptively.
[Guest]: The only way to do that, to protect the mosque under this circumstance is to impose central
[Guest]: rule, dismiss the Kalyan Singh government, take charge of the Babri Masjid and protect
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: There's nothing else you could have done.
[Guest]: So, the real question before Nassim Rao was, why did he trust Kalyan Singh?
[Guest]: Why did he not dismiss the government?
[Guest]: That's a valid question.
[Amit Varma]: But that would have, you're saying that would have been like punishing a thought crime because
[Amit Varma]: it hadn't been done yet.
[Guest]: That's the first problem.
[Guest]: As the law secretary to Nassim Rao said that, look, this is a problem because there can't
[Guest]: be a potential for breakdown in law in order to impose article 356, there has to be an
[Guest]: actual breakdown.
[Guest]: You can't dismiss someone for a thought crime.
[Guest]: Secondly, all those politicians who say that Nassim Rao should have imposed article 356,
[Guest]: why didn't they say that before the mosque fell?
[Guest]: Why didn't Mr. Chidambaram say before the mosque fell that Kalyan Singh should be dismissed?
[Guest]: Why didn't Sonia Gandhi say before the mosque fell that Kalyan Singh should be dismissed?
[Guest]: Why didn't Sharad Pawar say that?
[Guest]: Why didn't Arjun Singh of all people say that biggest critic of Nassim Rao?
[Guest]: The fact is that nobody was willing to give Nassim Rao the political cover to impose president's
[Guest]: rule.
[Guest]: And the reason for that was half the game was demolishing the mosque.
[Guest]: The other half was demolishing Nassim Rao.
[Guest]: And everybody was hoping that whatever happened on December 6, 1992, Nassim Rao would fall.
[Guest]: And Nassim Rao was praying and hoping that somebody would give him political cover to
[Guest]: impose article 356, impose president's rule, dismiss Kalyan Singh.
[Guest]: Nobody was willing to say that.
[Guest]: VP Singh didn't say that, Jyoti Basu didn't say that.
[Guest]: Everyone was hemming and hawing and saying that we are concerned, we stand with the Prime
[Guest]: Minister.
[Guest]: But nobody was actually saying that sentence, right?
[Guest]: Now, Nassim Rao as Prime Minister was not nobody.
[Guest]: He was somebody who should have done it.
[Guest]: On hindsight, he didn't.
[Guest]: It was an error.
[Guest]: But it was a very, very difficult decision to make.
[Guest]: Had he imposed president's rule, definitely BJP would have brought about a no confidence
[Guest]: motion saying murder of federalism, Congress is up to its old tricks.
[Guest]: And Nassim Rao was not confident that his own cabinet would support him.
[Guest]: In fact, after the demolition of Babri Masjid, when many of the cabinet ministers like Arjun
[Guest]: Singh or ML Fortedar were complaining saying Nassim Rao, you know, behave badly, this that
[Guest]: Pranab Mukherjee says in his memoirs that he told them, don't speak now, all the while
[Guest]: before Babri Masjid fell, all of you are agreeing with Nassim Rao, none of you are sticking
[Guest]: your neck out and saying impose president's rule, why are you doing it now, right?
[Guest]: The real question here is not the demolition of Babri Masjid, Amit.
[Guest]: I think the mistake we make is that those secularists amongst us see the rise of the
[Guest]: BJP, right, as ending Indian secularism and the standing of Babri Masjid as the standing
[Guest]: of Indian secularism, but it isn't.
[Guest]: The real question is the rise of the BJP and is there any law in India that could have
[Guest]: prevented it?
[Guest]: No, because it's a bottom up democratic rise.
[Guest]: And once that rise was ordained, the demolition of Babri Masjid was preordained.
[Guest]: Once Kalyan Singh comes to power in UP, it becomes very difficult to protect the Babri
[Guest]: Masjid.
[Guest]: If not then, then a few months later, if not a few months later, then a few months later,
[Guest]: something like this could have happened.
[Guest]: And the only thing that could have prevented that Nassim Rao didn't do, it's an error he
[Guest]: didn't do, but he was terrified if he did it, nobody else would back him up.
[Amit Varma]: And on this, I think I agree with him.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think this is a situation where he truly got bad cards, which he could do
[Amit Varma]: nothing with.
[Amit Varma]: Because had he, like you correctly said, you know, had he dismissed the Kalyan Singh government
[Amit Varma]: immediately anti-federalism and authoritarianism and all of that comes into play and rightly
[Amit Varma]: so.
[Amit Varma]: And he didn't dismiss them and he got screwed anyway.
[Guest]: So keep in mind, Amit, that immediately after the demolition of Babri Masjid, all the non-BJP
[Guest]: parties rallied behind Nassim Rao.
[Guest]: So at that time, they were not baying for his blood, this canard that Nassim Rao did
[Guest]: Babri Masjid was spread by the Congress party after Sonia ji takes control of the Congress
[Guest]: in 1998 as a way of destroying Nassim Rao's legacy.
[Guest]: So the story that Nassim Rao did Babri Masjid is not spread by the BJP or the opposition,
[Guest]: spread by the Congress party.
[Guest]: And if the Congress party is saying that their own Prime Minister did Babri Masjid, why will
[Guest]: anyone else stand up for Nassim Rao?
[Guest]: The catastrophe for Nassim Rao is he's a man without a constituency.
[Guest]: You can say anything about him and get away.
[Guest]: And the Babri Masjid is a good example.
[Guest]: Look, I'm very critical of him in his role in the Sikh riots.
[Guest]: But in the Babri Masjid case, he's been unfairly maligned.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to our sort of second last topic on the subject, which is going nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you have a fascinating chapter where you mentioned that Atal Bihari Vajpayee, when
[Amit Varma]: he took over from Nassim Rao, they met and Nassim Rao apparently told Vajpayee, Samagri
[Amit Varma]: Tayyar hai.
[Amit Varma]: So basically saying that I have set everything in place, and now it is in your hands.
[Amit Varma]: And so tell me a little bit about that, because this is also not very well known, in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that people give Vajpayee all the credit or the debit, as it were, for India actually
[Amit Varma]: going nuclear.
[Amit Varma]: But Nassim Rao put it completely in place and if not for circumstance and the main circumstance
[Amit Varma]: being losing that election, it would have happened under him.
[Amit Varma]: As Vajpayee himself recognized.
[Guest]: Well, it's my favorite chapter in the book.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to tell you all, there's a mystery there.
[Guest]: And I hope your listeners buy the book and read the mystery.
[Guest]: But I'm proudest that I don't think anyone else has had access to the documents and the
[Guest]: interviews that I have had on India's nuclear program.
[Guest]: Nobody right has had access.
[Guest]: I can't unfortunately on the show or on the record say how I got access to it.
[Guest]: But suffice to say that, you know, it gives you a sense on a on a minute by minute view
[Guest]: of how India's nuclear program is done, who is in the nuclear committee, I talk about
[Guest]: how Nassim Rao accelerated the nuclear program in 1991 onwards.
[Guest]: He didn't just accelerate the nuclear program, he also accelerated the program for delivery
[Guest]: of the nuclear bomb, which is both in terms of having a missile, that's where APJ Abdul
[Guest]: Kalam comes in, as well as through planes, right.
[Guest]: So that both of these are delivery mechanisms for the nuclear program.
[Guest]: And Nassim Rao had brought the program to fruition by 1995.
[Guest]: I talk about the cat and mouse game between him and his and the Americans.
[Guest]: And look, I know this chapter is not footnoted is deliberately not footnoted.
[Guest]: But it's the most fun chapter I had doing because there's a genuine mystery then there's
[Guest]: a there's a thrill there in how Nassim Rao outwits the Americans.
[Guest]: And yet, you know, is sagacious enough to not take credit by exploding the nuclear bomb
[Guest]: so close to an election.
[Guest]: If you had done it, you would have won, right.
[Guest]: But for him, national interest was more important, which is why an opposition leader from the
[Guest]: BJP Vajpayee, who we credit with testing nuclear weapons in 1998, actually said in his words
[Guest]: that the true father of India's nuclear program was Nassim Rao.
[Guest]: And he says this emotionally when Nassim Rao dies in 2004, saying that this is the man
[Guest]: whom we should thank and we haven't done it.
[Guest]: And yeah, I don't want to say more.
[Guest]: I'd like your listeners to actually read that chapter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and statesmanship on the part of Vajpayee to give credit or debit as it were, where
[Amit Varma]: it is due something that the Congress did not do.
[Amit Varma]: And this is perhaps the most heartbreaking element of this whole story that after doing
[Amit Varma]: all of this, you think that okay, he gets up, surely they'll give him the Bharat Ratna
[Amit Varma]: for whatever it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: Surely he'll be a national hero forever.
[Amit Varma]: He'll die a much loved man and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But instead, what happens is he dies in 2004 in Delhi, and the Congress does not want him
[Amit Varma]: to be cremated there.
[Amit Varma]: They insist that the body be taken to Hyderabad because Sonia just doesn't want him to remain
[Amit Varma]: a major figure to have a Samadhi in Delhi or whatever, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually, he is sort of taken to Hyderabad, there's a cremation of sorts there
[Amit Varma]: and gradually people have paid their respects and they kind of move away.
[Amit Varma]: And then there is a sentence from your book where you say, that night television channels
[Amit Varma]: showed visuals of the half burnt body, skull still visible, lying abandoned, stray dogs
[Amit Varma]: were pulling at the funeral pyre, stop quote, which is an amazing heartbreaking sentence
[Amit Varma]: that here is a man and his skull is, you know, still visible and stray dogs are pulling at
[Amit Varma]: his funeral pyre.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to be a metaphor for exactly what happened to him.
[Guest]: That's right.
[Guest]: That's why the chapter is called half burnt body.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, you know, what more can I say?
[Guest]: I mean, in any religious tradition, the treatment of the body, even the worst human being, the
[Guest]: body is treated, you know, in Hinduism, this is particularly important that the body is
[Guest]: treated with respect.
[Guest]: And the fact that even that didn't happen for the man tells you that how far his legacy
[Guest]: has been forgotten by us, right?
[Guest]: And I just hope that the book and this particular conversation we're having helps resurrect
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: It has resurrected him, but I hope it resurrects him even more because, look, there are plenty
[Guest]: of things about him that are a problem, right?
[Guest]: But he transformed India and he transformed India mostly for the good.
[Guest]: It wasn't fated to happen, right?
[Guest]: It required tremendous skill.
[Guest]: And it's something that we can learn about not just in politics today, but outside politics
[Amit Varma]: today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And absolutely remarkable leader.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, before I read your book, in fact, I already admired him and giving credit
[Amit Varma]: for a lot of what happened.
[Amit Varma]: But reading your book, actually just seeing that entire journey just made me go, wow,
[Amit Varma]: because we don't have a politician like that.
[Amit Varma]: And it's so tragic that, you know, that he should be treated like this by his own party
[Amit Varma]: for their own image building reasons.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, the kind of narrative manipulation that goes on.
[Amit Varma]: And there's so much else in your book, which I'll, you know, ask readers to go to.
[Amit Varma]: So let me kind of end with a final question as we just have like five minutes left.
[Guest]: What are you reading these days?
[Guest]: Well, I just finished reading my colleague Upinder Singh's book, Ancient India, Culture
[Guest]: of Contradictions.
[Guest]: I would recommend it very strongly.
[Guest]: It's a, you know, it summarizes several of the key issues when it comes to ancient India,
[Guest]: equality, gender, liberation, freedom, etc, etc.
[Guest]: She has a way of sticking to facts.
[Guest]: She has a way of being accessible.
[Guest]: She's opinionated like, you know, the best scholars are, but it doesn't interfere with
[Guest]: the way she tells the story.
[Guest]: So I really like that book.
[Amit Varma]: And she also happens to be the daughter of one of the protagonists of one of the people
[Amit Varma]: who comes out looking really good in the story, Manmohan Singh, because even after the Congress
[Amit Varma]: Party turns their back on him, he shows up every year at Narsimha Rao's, you know, birthday
[Amit Varma]: celebrations and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And he's kind of still sort of maintained that loyalty and that warm feeling.
[Guest]: Very much.
[Guest]: But I would say Upinder Singh is very much her own personality.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I didn't mean to, I mean, no one should be known as someone's daughter, especially.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And she's like, you know, she's one of the top, absolutely top scholars on Indian history.
[Guest]: So it's, you know, been quite, you know, definitely been quite enlightening.
[Guest]: So it's an amateur, I mean, mine is an amateur interest in history.
[Guest]: So it's nice to, you know, to engage with the works of such a professional historian.
[Guest]: Maybe you're the Narsimha Rao of political scientists where you're interested in so much
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: Well, I think I take that as a compliment.
[Amit Varma]: It was meant as a compliment.
[Amit Varma]: What else, anything you'd like to recommend to listeners in terms of books, films, music?
[Guest]: Well, you know, I recently read this book called Brideshead Revisited by Evelyn Waugh.
[Guest]: It's a phenomenal book, phenomenal.
[Guest]: It's been made into a film recently, but I would suggest you avoid that.
[Guest]: I think it was ITV, there's a basically a six part or six or seven part series, you
[Guest]: know, that came out in the mid 1990s, widely seen as the best TV series ever made, right?
[Guest]: At least at that time before the OTT explosion, it was seen as, you know, it was very expensive
[Guest]: series to be made around the same time Pride and Prejudice was made by BBC.
[Guest]: So I would recommend that strongly.
[Guest]: It's a bit slow by today's OTT standards, but Brideshead Revisited, the six or seven
[Guest]: part series, I would recommend if you don't want to read the book.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: So Vinay, thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: May Vinay Ram or Vinay Sitapati, as it were, continue to flourish and write many books.
[Guest]: Thank you very much.
[Guest]: This is a pleasure.
[Guest]: It's the first time we're doing this in person.
[Guest]: It just tells me that how inadequate Zoom is when it comes to building chemistry in
[Guest]: such a conversation.
[Guest]: So thank you very much, Amit.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Thank you for being here.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, check out the show notes where I've linked
[Amit Varma]: Vinay's books as well, enter rabbit holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: Buy both his books.
[Amit Varma]: His previous episode with me is linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Vinay doesn't seem to be on Twitter, smart person.
[Amit Varma]: That's why he's so productive.
[Amit Varma]: But you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.